---
layout: default
title: CS118
math: true
---

## Variables/Types

Program specifications define:
- Precondition: when should it work?
- input, calulcations, output
- Postcondition: what is the state after execution?

```
E.g. a GCD calculator:
- Precondition: always works when ran, given a correct a and b in specific range.
- Takes two numbers a and b, calulcates GCD, returns result.
- Postcondition: should terminate having retirned GCD of a and b.
```

**Representation and primitives:**

Floats and doubles:
IEEE-754 floating point is a standard of representation.
E.g. single precision (32 bits) : 1 bit sign + 8 bit exponent + 23 bit mantissa.
- Calculation of values are $x\ =\ (-1)^{sign}\ \cdot\ 1.(fraction)\ \cdot 2^{exponent}\ -\ bias$.
- The numbers are stored in the form $1.x \cdot 2^y$.

The bias is a fixed value which is the `2 ^ (number of exponent bits - 1) - 1`. Hence, 32 bit IEEE 754 has 8 exponent bits which makes its bias value $2^7 - 1 = 127$

Special values:
- If the exponent is `0000 0000` and fraction is 0 then value is 0 or -0.
If fraction is not 0 then renormalize with form $(-1)^{sign} \cdot 0.F\ \cdot 2^{-126}$.
- If exponent is `1111 1111` and fraction is 0 then value is +/- infinity. If fraction is not 0 then value is N/A.


---
## Casting

- Implicit casting (smaller to larger types)
```
byte -> short -> char -> int -> long -> float -> double
```
> Going backwards if unsafe, and is called "explicit" casting.

**Casting refers to the assignment of one primitive type to another, aka "typecasting".**

Generally "safe casting" refers to implicit widening casts where a smaller type is converted to a
larger one (e.g. int -> float) where precision is gained. This can be done automatically without
the programmer's indication there needs to be a typecast, hence the name "implicit".

Unsafe casting is the opposite, called a "narrowing cast" from a larger to smaller type (e.g. float
-> int) which must be explicitly done by the programmer. This is "unsafe" generally due to the
loss of precision/data.


## Evaluation

- single character is strict evaluation | and & means both sides are evaluated
- double characters, && and || are lazy operators...
- ++i is pre-incrementing where incrementation happens and then evaluation
- i++ evaluate first and then increment.


---
## Conditions and Switch

- ternary operator is: (boolCond) ? (ifTrue) : (ifFalse)

**switch:** 
only works with primitives and objects of primitives + enums on an equality basis (==).

checks cases for equality to the given value, evaluation happens top to bottom until 
default case or a break is found in one of the cases.

switch statements are faster than if else equivalents whenever there are 5 or more 
cases. The compiler creates a jump table for each case hence case to be executed
is accessed through key value maps. This is possible since the values in a switch
statement are constant at compile time and don't vary like if else conditions may.


---
## Repetition 

* Bounded Repetition - certain how many iterations will occur (for)

```java
for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
  // do something 10 times.
}
```

* Unbounded Repetition - not sure when iterations end (while)

A classic while loop checks some condition and given it is true evaluates the body of the loop until the condition ends up evaluating to false.

```java
while ( i < 10 ) {
  // do something.
  i++; // increment the variable used to eventially eval to false.
}
```

A while loop that always runs the body at least once before checking some condition is a `do while` loop.

```java
do {
  // do something.
} while ( expr );
```

**Break and Continue**

* `break` stops execution in the current scope.
* `continue` jumps over the current loop and goes to the next iteration.

---
## Arrays and Methods

Store a list of monomorphic types acess through indexes.

The `new` keyword allocates a contiguous block of memory.

Creating an array:
```java
int[] array_name = new int[ size ];
```

**Array declaration vs creation**

Array declaration refers to declaring an array variable to which an array structure can be assigned and referenced throughout a program. Array creation refers to using the new keyword
and actually reserving a contiguous block of memory for the array. 

A declaration can be done without creation however upon creating an array it will need to be assigned to a
declared array type hence creation cannot be done without declaration.

```java
int[] arr; // declaration
arr = new int[4]; // create an array of size 4 and assign to "arr"
```

When a new array is declared:
* Numerical values are all set to 0.
* Boolean values are all set to false.
* Arrays of objects are set to null.

Indexes start at 0 and end at n-1.

---

## Methods

Aim: modularize code and avoid excessive repetition.


**Acess Privilages**
- Public - accessible by 
- Private - only within the defined class.
- Protected - only within the defined class and the classes that inherit that class.


**Passing Parameters**
- By Value -  the value of some given variable is cloned in memory and exists within the scope of the methods; the original value will not change unless we return the result of that changes variable within the method and assign to the original variable.

- By Reference - objects will be passed by reference (strings, etc...) which means changes made anywhere within the program is made to the structure that points to the same memory location. Avoiding this will include cloning objects to make changes to the same structure but in some other memory location that doesn't affect the original structure.

Setting an object to another will create a new pointer to the same memory location. Structures to be clones must be created and items need to be copied across manually. There are static methods in Java to do this though; e.g. `System.arraycopy`.


---

## Recursion 

* Base case - termination condition of recursion.
* Recursive case(s) - do something for some condition within the recursive method.


---

## OOP

Classes are blueprints of potential objects and describe how these objects can be created and their behaviours.
Objects are made up of properties and behaviours.


### Constructors
Constructors are special methods that have no return type and have the exact same name as the class itself. Constructors can be overloaded.

**WHY DO WE NEED THEM**
The main reason we use constructors is to define a starting value for some (or all) of the properties
of a certain object as it is created. 

Constructors are special methods that allow the class to be instantiated with some set values at
creation. Constructors may be required to set, and store/encapsulate data within objects of a
class. They can have signatures that set some given parameters to the fields of a class,
otherwise may preset given no arguments.

**When do we not need constructors?**

In some cases, constructors may not need to be defined at all. These can be e.g. cases where
the class will never need to be instantiated such as a class of static methods that are called from
no specific instance of that class. Other may be classes that simply don't have any properties
but just methods (even non-static) and without an explicit definition of a constructor, java can
create instantiate an object of that class with some default constructor created at runtime, just
to be able to access the public methods of that class.



The `this` keyword is used when dealing with class variables to refer to instances of the variables.

When an object of a class is instantiated with the `new` keyword, enough memory is reserved and the constructor method is called to set initial values.

e.g.

```java
ClassName variable_name = new ClassName ( Constructor parameters );
```

--- 
### Comparing Objects

Only primitive types are compared with `==` and objects are compared with `equals` in Java.

---

### Static methods/variables

- Static variables and methods declared in a class belong to the whole class and not to any single instance of that class.

- Hence, static methods can be called without an instance of the class when outside of that class.

E.g. the main method needs to be accessible outside of a class and also be ran without an instance of the class hence must be `public static`. It won't return anything hence it is `void` and is always called `main`.

At Java runtime it should be possible for JRE to run the filename.main hence we must call a class the same name as its filename and make sure it has some static main method if it is to be ran//have a starting point.

> Static methods can be called from anywhere, but you cannot call a static method from a non-static context - unless you specify the instance it should run on.


**Static vs Non-static**
Static methods are methods that belong to the class itself and not a single instance of that
class; therefore, a class need not be instantiated to call a static method unless it must be called
from a non-static context.

Non-static methods are methods that belong to instances of classes and the class that defines it
must be instantiated to access those methods.
Static methods are used when a piece of code is to be used across all instances of a class or the
method is simply not dependent on instance creation and is not using any instance variables.
Otherwise, a non-static method will be used.


---

### Constants, `final`

Constants are `final` and cannot be assigned throughout a program.

**Enumerated values**
These are special classes that can hold a constant range of values. E.g. days of the week, cuisine types in a restaurant, etc...

Enums can have methods and properties since they are infact classes.

E.g.

```java
public enum Coin {
    PENNY(1), NICKEL(5), DIME(10), QUARTER(25);

    private int value;

    private Coin ( int val ) {
        value = val;
    } 

    public int getValue() {
        return value;
    }
}
```


### Encapsulation 

Encapsulation leads to "data-hiding", this concept refers to making data private and only accessible through public getters and setters (accessors/mutators). This way classes are used through their external interfaces.

- Restrict access to some data and methods (or to control the access of the data in our objects). Unnecessary detail is hidden.
- The implementation can change without ruining dependant applications. Maintains a good interface between programmers.
- Boundaries of responsibility are clear.

### Acess Modifiers

- `public` can be accessed outside the class
- `private` can only be accessed outside the class.
- `protected` can be seen by the class itself and any of its derived classes.

Hence access to data can be controlled and access restricted. Maintains a good interface between programmers instead of direct access to data.


Unspecified modifiers are `package-private` which are `protected` and `private`. This refers to methods being accessible only by other objects in the same package. This makes them the properties/behaviours of an entire class and not an object of the class.



### Inheritance

This is a set of properties retrieved from a parent - classes can inherit from base classes to form derived/subclasses.

Subclasses inherit some features/ behaviours from its parent class and hast some of its own - this refers to extending classes and cutting down repetitive codes.
- Less repetitive code.
- Runtime polymorphism.

```java
public class Cat extends Feline {}
```

**Overloading vs Overriding**

Overloading and overriding are both forms of polymorphism. Overloading is an example of
static polymorphism where methods of the same name within a class can be defined multiple
times with differing signatures in terms of the number of arguments and types to be passed.

Overriding is dynamic polymorphism where methods in subclasses implement a method of the
same name (within the superclass that defines it) differently such that at run-time the
overridden methods will be called based on the class instance that calls them.
Overloading is usually used within the same class while overriding is seen more in subclasses
that inherit superclasses.


### The `super` keyword

`super` refers to the instance of the superclass. With this we can call the superclass constructor to create objects of fields that are private within the subclass as so:

```java
public class Cat extends Feline {

  public Cat(String name, byte gender){
    super(name, gender);
  }

  public Cat(String name, byte gender, int age){
    super(name, gender, age);
  }

}
```

The superclass’s constructor should be the first thing that you call when defining the subclass constructor.

Above we demonstrate calling the superclass contructor and also parameter overloading of methods.

If the sublass doesn't call the superclass constructor, Java will call by default the no-argument contructor `super()` which may throw an error if the superclass itself doesn't define the method.

We can refer to instances of methods in the superclass. E.g. if we want to override some method in the subclass where we make some changes but still want to keep the original method within it also we can: 


```java
@Override
public void sleep () {
  super.sleep();
  // do extra things here.
}
```


### Polymorphism

Ability to process objects of different types through a single interface.

Method overloading is an example of `static polymorphism`.

### Dynamic vs Static Polymorphism

Static polymorphism is essentially method overloading. It is polymorphism because the name of the method can represent different methods and how Java understands which method to call is based on the type and/or number of parameters.
It is called static because when we compile code, Java will be able to decide at compile-time which method will be called based on the parameters provided (also known as static binding).

Dynamic Polymorphism is run-time polymorphism - Java will determine what class to treat a specific object when the program is executed. Within a class hierarchy, a subclass can override a superclass method to alter its behaviour. During runtime, the method to be called is decided through the instance that called it - if a subclass called it the overriden method will be called.


---

E.g. say some superclass derives two subclasses oth of which override some method to have different behaviours. Hence, we refer to the same base type having different behaviours in different contexts:

```java
public class Cat extends Feline {

  Cat lion = new Lion();
  Cat tiger = new Tiger();

  lion.sleep();
  tiger.sleep();

}
```

These two objects will behave differently at runtime, although the same type of objects.

If we call some method that is not defined in the Cat instance but only in the Lion instance then we want to cast the Cat object to Lion when calling that method.

```java
Cat lion = new Lion();

(Lion) lion = lion.roar();
```

To do this safely we might want to check that lion is infact an instance of the superclass of Lion -> Cat.

We can use the `instaceof` keyword:

```java
 if (c instaceof Cat) { // c is a Cat }
 ```

If we try to cast to some class that is not an instance of that object then we get a `ClassCastException`.


### Abstraction

This refers to exposing only high-level mechanisms and hiding implementation details of classes.

Abstract classes are special classes that cannot be instantiated, only capture high-level properties and behaviours at abstract level.

These classes can contain a mix of concrete and abstract methods that must be implemented.

```java
public abstract class Feline {

  // bunch of private properties common to all Felines.

  // getters setters.

  // abstract methods that all must implement.
  abstract public int getAge();
  abstract public String toString();


}
```
Abstract classes can extend abstract classes - won't need to implement methods since it is abstract itself.


**Interfaces**
States functionality but doesn't implement. A class can extend many abstract classes but can implement many interfaces.

This is mainly to avoid the confusion of multiple inheritance. Interfaces do not implement any methods hence there cannot be confusion of which superclass method to call through runtime polymorphism - the same doesn't apply to e.g. a class extending 2 abstract classes such that upon calling a method through that subclass we don't know how to differentiate between the methods of the two hypothetical superclasses.

```java
public interface Test {
  ...
}

public class TestImpl implements Test {
  ...
}
```

**Interfaces vs Abstract classes**

Interfaces define functionality with no concrete implementations of any methods. Abstract
classes also define functionality but can implement classes as well as define abstract methods
that must be implemented by some class that extends the abstract class.

Classes can implement many interfaces but only extend one abstract class at a time to avoid the
confusion of multiple inheritances at runtime.

**Abstract classes are used commonly for objects that are meant to be related while interfaces
define some common functionality for potentially unrelated classes.**

---

## Exceptions 


All errors and exceptions are subclasses of the `Throwable` class.

The `Throwable` class has two direct subclasses `Error` and `Exception`.

- `Error`s are a serious issue and are not caught but always thrown.
- `Exception`s are indication conditions and should probably be caught.

**In order to make your code throw exceptions, you must use a try-catch statement.**

### Checked Exceptions

- A checked exception is any exception that must be checked at compile-time. 

E.g. `FileNotFoundException` and `IOException` are both checked exceptions.

**Todo:**
- catch it: Surround statement in a try catch block
- rethrow it: rethrow the exception with `throws`.

There will be a compile time error if a checked exception is not caught. 

### Unchecked Exceptions
`Unchecked Exceptions` extend either `Error` or `RuntimeException`. These can be caught but don't need to be at compile-time.

E.g. `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException` and `NullPointerException`.

These errors are usually due to some logical error of the programmer while checked errors are usually due to input at runtime and because of the user instead of a logical error in the actual program.

---
**When is an exception checked or unchecked?**
- If a client can reasonably be expected to recover from an exception, make it a checked exception.
- If a client cannot do anything to recover from the exception, make it an unchecked exception.

**What happens when an exception is thrown in a try block?**
- The flow of execution of the program stops immediately after the throw statement is executed and the nearest enclosing try block is checked to see if it has a catch statement that matches the type of exception.
- If it finds a match, controlled is transferred to that statement otherwise next enclosing try block is checked and so on.
- If no matching catch is found then the default exception handler will halt the program.

---

### Writing Custom Exceptions
Exceptions are classes that extend the Exception class and it is possible to make your own exceptions for your applications. Usually we can just make a constructor and let the superclasses do the work. We can chain-exceptions and contain specific messages in custom Exceptions.

E.g. writing a custom Exception based on an existing one:

**Make sure to extend `RuntimeException` if unchecked.**

```java
class ItemNotFoundException extends Exception {
    public ItemNotFoundException() {
    super();
    }
    
    public ItemNotFoundException( String msg ) {
    super(msg);
    }

    public ItemNotFoundException( String msg, Throwable err ) {
        super(msg, err);
    }

    public ItemNotFoundException( Throwable err ) {
        super(err);
    }

}
```


---
### `throw` vs `throws`

- throw is used to manually throw an exception object (a class that is an instance of Throwable) that is not system generated (maybe custom).

- throws is used to let the compiler know that a method throws an exception and must be handled when it is called with a try catch block. 


---

### Try-catch blocks

- a try catch can be used to execute any sequence of statements that could potentially throw some exception and the catch blocks catch those exceptions and handle them accordingly without messing with the program sequence.

A sequence of statements are "tried" and in the event of some error an exception is thrown safely.

```java
try {
  // do something.
} catch (Exception e) {
  // handle this.
} catch (AnotherException e) {
  // do something else to handle this.
} ... etc.
```
---

**try-catch-finally**

The final block is used to clean things up e.g. close files and streams.

```java
try {
  // do something.
} catch ( Exception e ) {
  // all exceptions.
} finally {
  // always execute in the end.
}
```

e.g. Scan some integer from stdin:

```java
Scanner scan = new Scanner(System.in);
int i = 0;
try {
  i = scan.nextInt();
} catch ( InputMismatchException e ) {
  i = getInput();
} finally {
  scan.close();
  return i;
}
```

---

### Chained Exceptions

E.g. some custom Exception to do with what happens when reading files `FileReadingException` can be thrown when caught with a chain of exceptions as so:

```java

// try reading
catch (Exception e) { throw new FileReadingException("Couldn't read file.", e); }
```

### Exception order // Inheritance
If the first catch block is a superclass of another catch block, then the subclass catch block will never be executed

---

### Exception Methods

- `getCause()` cause of throwable.
- `addSuppressed(Throwable e)` appends some exception to the supressed..?? `getSupressed()`
- `fillInStackTrace()` `getStackTrace()` , set and print.
- `getMessage` `getLocalizedMessage()`

`getMessage()` returns the message added to the exception when it was thrown.
`printStackTrace()` prints out the chain of events that caused the exception.

Getting cause:

```java

// try reading
catch (FileReadingException e) { System.err.println("Root cause was:", e.getCause().getMessage());  }
```

Prints the cause instead of entire stack trace.


---

### Generics

Generics refers to parametrizing types such that classes/methods can be defined with no specific type but can be instantiated//called with some specific type at runtime.

Using Generics, it is possible to create classes that work with different data types.

---

### Explicit casting issue

Before generics, the Object class was used, the superclass of all other classes,such that if we wanted to create classes that worked with different types we would use Object throughout the class and then explicitly cast to the required object type:

e.g. `Object something = (String) Object();`

This lacks type safety since it wouldn't be an issue at compile time to try to insert an object cast to an integer to some e.g. array storing strings.

Instead, we define classes with parametrized types `<T>` etc. where upon creating some instance of that class with a given type during instantiation - all methods of that class that deals with T will check that further methods are given the correct types.

---

Using generics in your code makes it safer and more reusable, notably it allows
- stronger type checking at compile-time.
- elimination of type casts
- implementation of generic algorithms tailored to different types.

**The key implication of this is that you are less likely to encounter run-time errors because you can you catch type related errors at compile-time.**

E.g. when declaring some new generic structure we can put the type it will store in brackets `<>` to make sure to catch any type check errors, eliminate the issue of type casts everywhere and overall just allow implementation of single generic reusable classes.

Generic types naming conventions:

- `E` Element
- `K` Key
- `N` Number
- `T` Type
- `V` Value

e.g. generic class:

```java
public class someObject<T> {

  private T something;

  public someObject( T data ) {
    this.something = data;
  }

  // ...
}
```


Instantiation with different types:

```java
someObject<Integer> five = new someObject<>(5);
someObject<String> five = new someObject<>("hello");
```

and so on...

**Generic types cannot take primitives and only take their Object equivalents.**


---

### Restricting generic types

In Haskell we sometimes write functions that take or return arguments/values that are of some typeclass. E.g. `Num a` and so on. We can also achieve this with generics through `extends` to make the declared type extend some subclass i.e.

```java
public class someObject<T extends Number> {
  // T takes only numerical values...
}
```

Classes, variables, methods can all be declared generically; just to demonstrate generic methods:

```java
public T methodName( T data, ... ) { ... }
```

























