---
layout: default
title: CS126
math: true
---
## Analysis

**Experimental Analysis**

> One of the ways to assess the running time is to write a program implementing the algorithm, then run for inputs of different sizes.

Experimental Analysis has drawbacks that makes theoretical analysis/asymptotical analysis more popular and practical.

- Need to implement the algorithm – might be difficult, time consuming.
- Many ways to implement – reason for analysis is to decide which one to implement
- Not all inputs can be covered – not representative
- Dependent on machine hardware and software environments – difficult to equate between different tests, same specs and same environment needed.

**Theoretical Analysis**

Theoretical analysis is given a high-level description of the algorithm (not a full implementation), expressing the running time as a function of the input size n.
Pseudocode is used for this high-level description, which lies between English prose and program code. It has no formal syntax, and allows omission of some aspects of the implementation to make analysis easier.

This has the benefits of:

- Allowing all possible inputs to be covered
- Being independent of machine hardware and software environments, so easier to equate between different tests.

**Asymptotic Analysis**

- Big O describes an upper bound of some function describing the running time of an algorithm. 

> More formally this is defined as the existance of constants $c$ and $n_0$ such that $f(n) \leq c \cdot g(n)$ $\forall n \geq n_0\ where\ c > 0, n_0 > 0$

- Big Omega describes a lower bound, assessing what the least running time of some algorithm is.

> Formally we have constants $c$ and $n_0$ such that $f(n) \geq c \cdot g(n)$ $\forall n \geq n_0\ where\ c > 0, n_0 > 1$

- Big Tetha describes a lower and upper bound that sandwiches the described time function for some algorithm.

> This means if $f(n) \in \theta(g(n))$ then it must be that $f(n) \in O(g(n))$ and $f(n) \in \Omega(g(n))$. More formally, $c_1 \cdot g(n) \leq f(n) \leq c_2 \cdot g(n)\ \forall n \geq n_0$ 
> $where\ c_1 > 0\ and\ c_2 > 0$

**Expressing and Proving Big O notations**
- Showing some function is a member of Big O we eliminate low order terms and constant coefficients.
- To prove something is $O(f(n))$ we need to show that we can pick a $c$ and a $n_0$ which satisfy the condition. To prove something is not $O(f(n))$ we show that there is no $c$ for any arbitrarily large $n_0$ which satisfies the condition.

## Arrays

*Definition:* 
- A sequenced collection of variables with the same type.
- Each cell has an index which will refer to the value stored in that cell. $0..(n-1)$.
-  Every value in a cell is referred to as an element.
- Arrays have fixed capacity/length set when created.
- Stores primitives or object references.
- $O(1)$ get and set operations since they are indexable structures.

**Uses**
The most common use of arrays is to simply keep track of an ordered sequence of related values or objects.

**Usage in Java**
**Static arrays could be created as so:**
`type[] arrayName = new type[size]`

The `new` operator, in this case, returns a reference to the new array. This is assigned to the identifier `arrayName`.

**Array Drawbacks**
- Insertions and deletions at interior positions of an array can be time consuming if many elements must be shifted, $O(n)$
- The capacity of the array must be fixed when it is created; to resize the array, a new, larger array needs to be created, then all the data copied into that, in an operation which takes $O(n)$ time.

## Sorting Arrays

Given an array of unordered elements, put them into order.

**Insertion Sort**
This algorithm, starts at the beginning of the array and for each cell it places them in the right order relative to the previous element.

Pseudocode:
```
insertionSort(Array a) 
  input : array a of n unordered elements
  output : the array with ordered elements, in nondecreasing order

  for i in range (1, a.length)
    insert a[i] to the proper location within the array
```
Example Java Code:
```
insertionSort(int[] a){
  for (i = 1; i < a.length; i++) {
    int cur = a[i]; // keep track of current cell
    int j = i; // for insertion loop

    while ( j > 0 && a[j-1] > cur ) {
      a[j] = a[j-1]; // place value of next cell to current cell
      j--; // compare to every cell until correct place found
    }

    data[j] = cur; // place the element in found position
}
```

***Complexity Analysis***
**Time complexity:**
- Best-case: O(n), single comparisons
- Worst case: O(n^2), compare the entire remaining list each time (array in reverse order)
- Average case is usually quadratic, insertion sort is impractical for sorting large arrays. Insertion sort is usually quicker than quickersort for smaller array though; hence, good quicksort algorithms use insertion sort for arrays smaller than a certain treshold.

**Space Complexity:**
- $O(1)$ Constant.


## Singly Linked Lists
- A linked list is a concrete data structure consisting of a sequence of nodes pointing to each other, starting from a head pointer.
- Each node stores the element and the location of the next node in the list.
- A linked list that doesn't have cycles will have a node, tail, that points to 'null'.
- Traversing a linked list is also known as 'node hopping'.

**Insertion**

- Add an element, e, to the head of a linked list:
```java
addFirst(e):
  Node newest = new Node(e);
  newest.next = head; // point new head to old one
  head = newest; // new head
  size++;

```

- Add an element, e, to the tail of a linked list:
```java
addLast(e):
  Node newest = new Node(e);
  newest.next = null; // end of linked list
  tail.next = newest; // point old tail to new tail
  tail = newest; // new tail
  size++;
```

If there is no pointer to the tail as part of the implementation then it will be necessary to loop the entire list until the end and add the node there.

```java
addLast(e):
  Node temp = head;

  while ( temp.next != null )
    temp = temp.next;

  temp.next = new Node(e);
```

**Deletion**

- Remove the first element:
```
removeFirst():
  if head == null then
    list is empty error
  head = head.next; // make the preceding node head
  size--;
```

A complete 'singly-linked list' class:
- size()
- isEmpty()
- first()
- last()
- addFirst(e)
- addLast(e)
- removeFirst()

Usually, the type doesn't matter hence generics are used. E.g.
`public class SinglyLinkedList<E>`
where E will represent the user's desired element type to be stored in the linked list.

It is not possible to, efficiently (in constant time), delete the tail of a list. This is because there is no pointer to the previous node from the tail. To do this, the only option is to traverse the entire linked list to find the node that is linked to the tail.

Instead, we use 'doubly-linked lists'.

## Doubly-Linked Lists

Doubly-linked lists can be traversed both ways, they are in a sense symmetric. 

- The nodes in such a list will store the element value, and two pointers that point to the previous and the next node.

**Improvements from singly linked lists**
A doubly-linked list allows more constant time operations and includes arbitrary insertions and deletions at any index.

**The header and trailer**
These two nodes govern the boundaries of the linked list. They are special nodes, also known as dummy nodes or sentinels (guards). These nodes do not store elements. The idea is that the header's next node is the first elements of the list, while the trailer's previous node is the last.

The small amount of memory allocated for these dummy nodes makes operations easier and the logic easier to implement. The only changing nodes are the nodes that are in between the header and the trailer.

A complete implementation would be:
- size()
- isEmpty()
- first()
- last()
- addFirst(e)
- addLast(e)
- removeFirst()
- removeLast()

---

### Equivalence testing and cloning structures


Two instances of a class (data structure) are equal if they have the same size and elements.
The equals method takes an arbitrary `Object`. We check:

```java
public boolean equals(Object o) {
  /** Is o null?*/
  if (o == null) return false; 

  /** Is o and the instance that calls the method instances of the same class? */

  if (getClass() != o.getClass()) return false;

  /** Cast the aritrary object to the class instance and then check size and elements */

  ClassName temp = (ClassName) o;
  // ...
}
```

Cloning arrays consists of creating a new one of the same size and copying all the elements of the array to be copied to the clone.

Classes can implement the `Clonable` interface and implement the method `clone` in order to encapsulate this functionality into a simple method call.

---
## Dynamic Lists and ArrayLists

- The list ADT provides general support for adding and removing elements at arbitrary positions.
- The structure can be implemeneted as a dynamic data structure with no fixed size determined at compile time.

```java
public interface List<E>{
    int size();
    boolean isEmpty();
    E get(int i); //get the item from the index i
    E set(int i, E e); //set the index i to the element e, returning what used to be at that index
    E add(int i, E e); //insert an element in the list at index i
    void remove(int i); //remove the element from index i
}

```

**Implementations**

- Array based = ArrayLists:

Array lists are growable implementations of the List ADT that use arrays as the backing data structure. The idea is that as more elements are added, the array resizes itself to be bigger, as needed.

**Drawkbacks in implementation**
- When inserting, room must be made for new elements by shifting other elements forward
  - Worst case (inserting to the head) $O(n)$ runtime
- When removing, need to shift elements backward to fill the hole
  - Same worst case as insertion, $O(n)$

**Resizing**
The strategy to decide how large the new array will be can differ:
- Incremental - increase the size by a constant value
  - Amortized (average) time of each push is $\Omega(n^2)$
    Space grows linearly, so quite space efficient.
- Doubling - double the size
  - Amortized (average) time of each push is $\Omega(n)$
    Space grows exponentially, so less space efficient

To compare the two strategies, the total time, $T(n)$ needed to perform n pushes is analyzed. Amortized time of a push, average time is $T(n)/n$

---

### String Builder
- The StringBuilder class represents a mutable string by storing characters in a dynamic array and it can be appended to.
  -  It guarantees that a series of append operations resulting in a string of length n execute in a combined time of `O(n)`.
- In comparison, `String`s are immutable and cannot be appended to; a new object will be created each time it is concatenated with some other final string.

## Positional Lists

**Definition**
- Positional lists are a “general abstraction of a sequence of elements with the ability to identify the location of an element, without indices”.

**Implementation details**
- A position acts as a token or marker within the broader positional list
- A position p is unaffected by changes elsewhere in a list
  - It only becomes invalid if explicitly deleted
- A position instance is an object (ie there is some Position class)
ie p.getElement() returns the element stored at position p
- A very natural way to implement a positional list is with a doubly linked list, where each node represents a position.
  - Where a pointer to a node exists, access to the previous and next node is fast (O(1))

**Java interface**

```java

public interface PositionalList<E>{
    int size();
    boolean isEmpty();
    Position<E> first(); //return postition of first element
    Position<E> last();  //return position of last element
    Position<E> before(Position<E> p); //return position of element before position p
    Position<E> after(Posittion<E> p); //return position of element after position p
    void addFirst(E e); //add a new element to the front of the list
    void addLast(E e); // add a new element to the back of the list
    void addBefore(Position<E> p, E e); // add a new element just before position p
    void addAfter(Position<E> p, E e); // add a new element just after position p
    void set(Position<E> p, E e); // replaces the element at position p with element e
    E remove(p); //removes and returns the element at position p, invalidating the position
}

```
---

## Iterators
- An iterator is a software design pattern that abstracts the process of scanning through a sequence of elements, one element at a time.
-  A collection is `Iterable` if it has an `iterator()` method, which returns an instance of a class which implements the `Iterator` interface. Each call to `iterator()` returns a new object.

```java
public interface Iterator<E>{
    boolean hasNext(); //returns true if there is at least one additional element in the sequence
    E next(); //returns the next element in the sequence, advances the iterator by 1 position.
}
```

**For-each loops**
Java’s Iterable class also plays a fundamental role in support of the “for-each” loop syntax:

```java
for (ElementType variable : collection) {
  loopBody // may refer to ”variable”
}
```

This an also be written with an iterator:

```java
Iterator<ElementType> iter = collection.iterator();
while (iter.hasNext( )) {
  ElementType variable = iter.next( );
  loopBody // may refer to ”variable”
}
```

---

**Types of iterators**

- Snapshot iterators - create a copy of the sequence of elements at the time the iterator object is created. This makes it so that the iterator isn't affected by any changes that may be made to the collection in the loopbody.  The downside of this style of iterator is that it requires O(n) time and O(n) auxiliary space, upon construction, to copy and store a collection of n elements.

- Lazy iterators - without any copies of the primary collection, iterates the collection with the next method. The iterator requires only O(1) space and O(1) construction time. . One downside (or feature) of a lazy iterator is that its behavior is affected if the primary structure is modified before the initial iteration is completed.


**Why and when to use iterators:**

The primary purpose of an iterator is to allow a user to process every element of a container while isolating the user from the internal structure of the container. This allows the container to store elements in any manner it wishes while allowing the user to treat it as if it were a simple sequence or list.

> An iterator is used when you want to remove stuff whilst you iterate over the array contents. If you don't use an iterator but simply have a for loop and inside it use the remove method you will get exceptions because the contents of the array changes while you iterate through.
---

## Recursive Algorithms

Recursion allows a problem to be broken down into sub-problems, defining a problem in terms of itself.

- A recursive method is one that calls itself.
- Some common applications of recursion are factorials, fibonacci, any other task where the goal to be reached consists of similar smaller subtasks.
- Method calls are stored in the stack with parameters, local variables and data about each invocation.
- Recursive algorithms have base and recursive cases.
- Recursive algorithms are classified in terms of the number of times they are called/'active'. E.g. Linear, binary, multiple.

|Pros|Cons|
|---|---|
|Can reduce time complexity given the same recursive calls are not made multiple times and the results of recursive calls are memoized if they are expected to be used again. |Usually is less space efficient due to each recrusive call being pushed to stack. There are tail recursion optimizations given the recursive methods are written well, but iterative solutions are usually much more space efficient. |
|Recursive methods are much more clear/elegant and easier to debug than equivalent iterative solutions to a problem. |Without memoization or tail optimizations recursion can be slow.|
|Performs better in solving problems based on tree structures/D&Q algorithms.|Prone to stack overflows if not careful with base cases.|
---

### Binary Search
A classic recursive algorithm, binary search, used to efficiently locate a target value within a sorted sequence of n elements stored in an array.

**Downsides**
- The structure being searched must be sorted. Otherwise a sequential/linear search must be performed, this is of linear time complexity `O(n)`.

**The binary search algorithm:**

Binary search is essentially a game of high-low. First we rule the high as the entire length of the sequence and low as 0 (array indexing compliant).

Then a median candidate is selected through the use of this formula:

`mid = floor((low - high) / 2)`

Next steps are along the lines of:
- if the candidate `mid` is the target value then return that.
- if the candidate `mid` is greater than the target value then set `low` to `mid + 1` and return a recursive call to the function with that.
- if the candidate `mid` is less than the target then set `high` to `mid - 1` and recur on that.

An edge case to consider is when `low > high`, where we must return false as the element is not in the structure.

Consider the code below:

```java
public static boolean binarySearch(int[] data, int target, int low, int high) {
  if (low > high)
    return false; // interval empty; no match
  else {
    int mid = (low + high) / 2;
    if (target == data[mid])
      return true; // found a match
    else if (target < data[mid])
      return binarySearch(data, target, low, mid − 1); // recur left of the middle
    else
      return binarySearch(data, target, mid + 1, high); // recur right of the middle
    }
  }
```

**Analysis of Binary Search**

At each call there is a constant number of primitive operations and time is proportional to the number of recursive calls.

Worst case:
`O(logn)` time complexity.
This is because, after each call the number of candidates being searched halves. After the jth call, number of candidate elements is at most `n/2^j`

Best case:
`O(1)` time complexity.
The first call could be the target element.


---

### Binary Recursion - Two recursive calls for each non-base case.

A good example of binary recursion is Fibonacci numbers calculated recursively.
The bit where n > 0 the return statement is often:

```java
return fibonacci(n-1) + fibonacci(n-2)
```
This is basically non-tail recursion where a return statement of a single recursive call requires another recursive call to be returned. This is bad for space complexity often when compared to tail recursion.

---

### Linear Recursion - A single recursive call for each non-base case.

E.g. The the sum of elements of an array:
```java
public static int linearSum(int[] data, int n) {
  if (n == 0) return 0;
  return linearSum(data, n−1) + data[n−1];
}
```

For an input size n, the time complexity of `linearSum` is proportional to the number of recursive calls hence `O(n)`. This complexity is the same for the memory space used due to the linear amount of stack frames that the non-tail recursive method keeps. Overall, an interative method is proably much wiser since we're wasting memory here.

Another example is a function that calculates powers.

![power(x,n) = \begin{cases}
 & 1 \text{ if n = 0 }  \\ 
 & x \cdot \text{ power(x, n-1) otherwise }
\end{cases}](https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?%7B%5Ccolor%7BRed%7D%20power%28x%2Cn%29%20%3D%20%5Cbegin%7Bcases%7D%20%26%201%20%5Ctext%7B%20if%20n%20%3D%200%20%7D%20%5C%5C%20%26%20x%20%5Ccdot%20%5Ctext%7B%20power%28%7B%5Ccolor%7BRed%7D%20%7Dx%2C%20n-1%29%20otherwise%20%7D%20%5Cend%7Bcases%7D%7D)

```java
public static double power(double x, int n) {
  if (n == 0)
    return 1;
  else
    return x ∗ power(x, n−1);
  }
```

A recursive call to this version of `power(x,n)` runs in `O(n)` time. This can be reduced to `logn`. See [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/26689929/power-function-using-recursion) to find out how.

---

### Multiple Recursion - may make more than two recursive calls.

Generalizing from binary recursion, we define multiple recursion as a process in which a method may make more than two recursive calls. This should generally be avoided for the sake of efficiency.

A common application of multiple recursion is when we want to enumerate various configurations in order to solve a combinatorial puzzle.

---

## ADTs

- Blueprint a data type
- An ADT is an abstraction of a data structure.
- Specifies operations on data, data stored, error conditions associated with operations.
- Often expressed with an interface in Java, focusing on what operations are and not how they are done concretely.

---
## Stacks

- Stacks are a collection of objects following the last in first out (LIFO) principle.
- Insertion AND removal is from the top of the stack.
- Poppgin from an empty stack returns null.
- Typical applications: undo sequence, previous tabs, stack frame JVM method calls (stack frames)...

**ADT**
Commonly this data type supports the following operations:

- push(e), pushes an element, e, to the stack.
- pop(), pops the elements at the top of the stack
- peek(), peeks at the top element but doesn't pop it
- size(), number of elements in stack
- isEmpty(), a boolean whether stack is empty or not.


**Implementation with a static array**

In Java:
```java
public class ArrayStack<E> {
    private E[] elems;    // stack
    private int top = -1; // pointer

    public ArrayStack(int capacity){
        elems = (E[]) new Object[capacity];
    }

    public isEmpty() { return top == -1; }

    public E pop(){
        if (isEmpty()) return null;
        E toReturn = elems[top];
        elems[top--] = null; // garbage collection
        return toReturn;
    }
    public void push(E e){
        if (top + 1 == elems.length) throw new IllegalStateException("Stack is full"); //cant push to full stack
        elems[++top] = e;
    }
}


```

**Analysis:**
- $O(n)$ space, and $O(1)$ operations as arrays are indexable.
- The array has a fixed size, set during instantiation of the `ArrayStack` object, exceeding limit throws an `IllegalStateException`. Use a dynamically growing structure like an `ArrayList` or a `LinkedList`.
- A linked-list approach has memory usage that is always proportional to the number of actual elements currently in the stack, and without an arbitrary capacity limit.
    - Hence we don't waste unused space and we can avoid `IllegalStateException`s. (scalable and memory efficient)
    - Can insert without set capacity at compile time since linked lists are dynamic and can grow at runtime. Less risk of exceptions at runtime.

- `Java.util.Stack` extends the `Vector` abstract class. This means its methods are accessible through a stack structure. This makes it so that it is not strictly a LIFO structure but more like a double pointer queue. E.g. items could possibly be taken out from the bottom of the stack.


**Common Problems**
- Reversing the elements of a structure.
- Balanced Brackets.
---

## Queues

- Queues are data structures with a FIFO principle.
- Element removal is limited to the front of the queue AND insertion is only from the back.
- This means that the element that has been in the array longest can be removed first. 
- Common applications: Round robin scheduling, access to shared resources.

The following operations are supported:

- `enqueue(e)` - adds an element, `e` to the back of the queue.
- `dequeue()` - removes an element from the front of the queue and returns it.
- `first()` - returns the first element.
- `size()` - returns the number of elements in the queue.
- `isEmpty()` - boolean value on the state of the queue.

**Array Based Queue Implementation**
Dequeuing an array implementation of a queue would complicate the queue operation. In order to achieve constant time complexity the the front of the queue could be dereferenced at runtime instead of moving all elements up by 1 each time, which would drift the starting index of the queue farther from 0 with each operation and waste space. 

To avoid such a case, queues are used circularly. Instead of straying from index 0 towards N, we allow queuing to wrap around the array such that two seperate pointers refer to the front and back of this circular queue.

To do this, the modulo operator is used when calculating the index to operate on;.We move the back pointer during `enqueue()` and front pointer during `dequeue()`.

E.g:
```java

public class ArrayQueue<E> {

    private E[] queue;
    private int front,rear;
    private int size;

    public ArrayQueue( int capacity ) {
        this.queue = (E[]) new Object[capacity];
        this.front = 0;
	this.rear = -1;
        this.size = 0;
    }

    public int getSize() {
        return this.size;
    }

    public boolean isEmpty() {
        return this.size == 0;
    }

    public void enqueue( E e ) {
        if ( getSize() == queue.length )
            throw new IllegalStateException("Queue is full");

        rear = (rear+1) % queue.length;
        queue[rear] = e;
        size++;

    }

    public E dequeue() {
        if ( isEmpty() ) return null;
        E toReturn = queue[front];
        queue[front] = null;
        front = (front+1) % queue.length;

        size--;
        return toReturn;

    }
}
```

- To avoid all of these a linkedlist approach could also be used but in theory the operations of a singly linked list queue will be relatively more expensive due to the instantiation and initialization of new nodes etc...

---

## Maps

- A map is an ADT (associative array) designed to efficiently store and retrieve values based upon a uniquely identifying search key for each.
- Maps store key value pairs, called entries. Keys are unique and values are retrivable through keys.
- Implementations usually do not allow duplicate keys and each entry is unique.

**The Map ADT functionality:**
```java
public interface Map<K,V>{
    int size();
    boolean isEmpty();
    V get(K key); //return the value associated with key in the map, or null if it doesn't exist
    void put(K key, V value); //associate the value with the key in the map
    void remove(K key); //remove the key and it's value from the map
    Iterable<Entry<K,V>> entrySet(); //return an iterable collection of the values in the map
    Iterable<K> keySet(); //return an iterable collection of the keys in the map
    Iterable<V> values(); //return an iterator over the map's values
}


```
> Two common implementations of the Map interface are with lists or hash tables.

**Implementation with an `ArrayList`**
A basic map can be implemented using an unsorted list.
- $O(n)$ lookup and insertion, as the whole list needs to be iterated over to check for duplicates (keys).
- $O(n)$ space complexity, as there are no duplicates.

E.g.

```java
private ArrayList<MapEntry<K,V>> table = new ArrayList<>( );
```

- `get(K key)` - linear search looking for entry with the given key, return value if found, otherwise of end of list is reached.
- `put(k,v)` - linear search list to see if key exists, replace or add the entry to the list.
- `remove(k)` - linear search for key entry and remove it if found.

---
## Hash Tables

> Hash tables are a time efficient implementation of the Map abstract data type.

- A hash table supports the abstraction of using keys as “addresses” that help locate an entry. This means that, through hashing ($f : key -> address$) we compute the address of a value in the hash table i.e. `addr = key mod size`
  - This way lookups usually take constant time, unless we face collisions due to a bad hash function. 
- The goal of a hash function, h, is to map each key k to an integer in the range $[0, N-1]$, where N is the capacity of the bucket array for a hash table.

---
**Hash codes and compression functions**
- What is hashing?
	- Hashing is the process of converting a given key into another value. A hash function is used to generate the new value according to a mathematical algorithm. In the 		context of hash tables we hash keys into matching indices in a table from $[0..n-1]$ elements.
	- In the ideal case, with a "good" hash function (less likely to collide) and a load factor not close to 1, O(1) operations to insert to an indexable table.

A hash function can map general keys (ie not integers) to corresponding indices in a table/array.

E.g. $h(x) = x\ mod\ N$ turns a key x into a hashed integer.

**Components of hash functions**
It is common to view the evaluation of a hash function, h(k), as consisting of two portions; a hash code that maps a key k to an integer, and a compression function that maps the hash code to an integer within a range of indices, $[0, N − 1]$, for a bucket array. 

- Hash code $h_{hc}$ - maps keys to integers
- Compression function $h_{cf}$ - maps integers to integers in range $[0, N - 1]$.
- Hash code then compression function: $h(x) = h_{cf}(h_{hc}(x))$

The advantage of separating the hash function into two such components is that the hash code portion of that computation is independent of a specific hash table size.

This is particularly convenient, because the underlying bucket array
for a hash table may be dynamically resized, depending on the number of entries currently stored in the map.

---
**Usage of prime numbers to take remainders**
> When using `hash(x) = x mod n` for hashing integers x, we pick n to be a prime number.

This is because every key that shares a common factor with the number of buckets in the table will be hashed into a ucket that is a multiple of this factor. Hence, to reduce collisions we want to reduce the number of common factors and a prime number will have fewer factors than a non-prime option.

**Hash Codes can be:**
- Memory addresses of objects.
- Integer cast smaller types to integer type bits.
- Component sum/folding method - Partition they key into bitwise components of fixed length and sum the components.
- Polynomial accumulation - Partition the bits of the key into a sequence of components of fixed length $a_1, a_2, ..., a_n$. Calculate the polynomial $P(y) = a_1 + a_2.y + a_3.y^2 + ... + a_n.y^n$ for a fixed y.
- Cyclic, bitwise shift operations/shuffling.
- `hashCode()` 

---
**Java `hashCode()` and `equals()`**
Hash codes are an integral part of Java. The Object class, which serves as an ancestor of all object types, includes a default `hashCode()` method that returns a 32-bit integer of type int, which serves as an object’s hash code.

The default version of `hashCode()` provided by the Object class is often just an integer representation derived from the object’s memory address.

> Two objects that are equal have the same hashcode by definition of object equivalence.


```java
x.equals(y);  
// means
x.hashCode() == y.hashCode();
```

**Good compression functions**
- A good compression function is one that minimizes the number of collisions for a given set of distinct hash codes.
- If a hash function is chosen well, it should ensure that the probability of two different keys getting hashed to the same bucket is `1/N`.

Some are:
- Division method: $i mod N$ where the hash code is divided by the length of the array N.
- MAD method: $[(ai + b)\ mod\ p]\ mod\ N$; where N is the size of the bucket array, p is a prime number larger than N, and a and b are integers chosen at random from the interval `[0, p − 1]`, with `a > 0`.

---
**Collisions**
If there are two or more keys with the same hash value, then two different entries will be mapped to the same bucket in the table. In this case, we say that a collision has occurred.

We say that a hash function is “good” if it maps the keys in our map so as to sufficiently minimize collisions. 

Strategies used to avoid collisions:
- Closed Addresing: Let each cell in the hash table point to a linked list/another map of entries. This has a memory tradeoff and is also known as seperate chaining.
  - In this solution we calculate index to insert to with the hash function and then travserse the linked list to locate the key/value pair.   
- Open addressing: the colliding item is placed in a different cell on the table. Also known as "probing".

E.g. of open addressing:
**Linear probing**
This method places the colliding item in the next available table cell. this is essentially a linear search for the next empty spot in the table, if none is found at the end of the list we "wrap around" to the beginning of the list.

i.e.
```
get(k) 
  start at cell h(k)
  probe consecutive locations until:
    key is found OR
    empty cell is found OR
    all cells were probed

remove(k)
  search for an entry with the key k
  if found: replace with defunct and return v
  else: return null
```

- Disadvantage: Colliding items can lump together, causing future collisions to cause a longer sequence of probes.

Deletions and insertions are handled with sentinel objects such that they can be skipped when probing but can be inserted into with a put operation.

Bottom line is that chaining is usually better than the worst case of an array traversal with open addressing. However, when the load factor is small than linear probing may be faster.

Another way to deal with collisions is to allocate more memory than required. This depends on something called the "load factor".

The load factor is a measure of how full the hash table is allowed to get before its capacity is automatically increased. When the number of entries in the hash table exceeds the product of the load factor and the current capacity, the hash table is rehashed (that is, internal data structures are rebuilt) so that the hash table has approximately twice the number of buckets.

- As a general rule, the default load factor (.75) offers a good tradeoff between time and space costs. Higher values decrease the space overhead but increase the lookup cost (reflected in most of the operations of the HashMap class, including get and put). The expected number of entries in the map and its load factor should be taken into account when setting its initial capacity, so as to minimize the number of rehash operations.


**Double hashing**
- Double hashing uses two hash functions $h()$ and $f()$
- If cell $h(k)$ already occupied, tries sequentially the cell $(h(k)+i⋅f(k))modN$ for $i=1,2,3...$ where $f(k)$ can never be zero.
- E.g. $f(k) = 1$ is linear probing.

--- 
**Efficiency & Performance**

> A hash map aims to have all elements in unique positions and use all the space available without wasting extra space.

Realistically, we aim to minimize collisions using the schemes above (a good load factor is important) and have a uniform distrivution of entries. For all this we need to have a good hash function that is easy to calculate and minimizes collisions.

- In the worst case, operations on hash tables take $O(n)$ time when the table is full and all keys collide into a single cell.
- Given a good hash function and a load factor of $\alpha = n/N$ where n is the number of entries and N is the size of the table.
For large $\alpha$, collision is likely - otherwise less likely.
- Provided the load factor  is good, $\alpha < 1$ we have $O(1)$ operations expected usually with low risks of collision.

---
**Sorted Maps**
- Skip Lists

---

## Sets

- A set is an unordered collection of elements, without duplicates, that typically supports efficient membership tests.
- In essence, elements of a set are like keys of a map, but without any auxiliary values.
- Sets also provide for traditional mathematical set operations: Union, Intersection, and Subtraction/Difference.

**Set ADT**
```java
public interface Set<E>{
    void add(E e); //add element e to set if not already present
    void remove(E e); //remove element e from set if present
    boolean contains(E e); //test if element e is in set
    Iterator<E> iterator(); //returns an iterator over the elements
    void addAll(Set<E> T); // union
    void retainAll(Set<E> T); //intersection
    void removeAll(Set<E> T); //difference
}

```
- A multiset (also known as a bag) is a set-like container that allows duplicates.

[List, map, vs sets](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/difference-between-list-set-and-map-in-java/y)

**Implementations**
Commonly the same for maps, using lists or hash sets.
- List Implementation:
  - Generally, the space complexity is $O(n)$. Since sets are not indexable, linked lists can be used, offering efficient re-sizing.
  - We need to iterate over each element in the list to lookup items, $O(n)$ time complexity, which is not efficient, but for most more complex set operations, this becomes less of a drawback.


- Hash Set Implementation:
  - Hash-sets are implemented like a hash-table, but using only keys, not key-value pairs. This gives fast $O(1)$ lookups, and an $O(n)$ space complexity, but with large overheads.
---

## Trees

A tree is an abstract model of a hierarchial, non-linear ADT. A tree consists of nodes with a parent-child relation. A parent has one or more children; each child has only one parent.
- The root is the only node without a parent node.
- An internal node has at least one child, a leaf (external node) is a node with no children.
- The depth of a node is its number of ancestors.
- The height of a tree is the maximum depth of its root.

> In linear data structure, data elements are sequentially connected and each element is traversable through a single run. In non-linear data structure, data elements are hierarchically connected and are present at various levels.

**Interface**

```java
public interface Tree<E>{
    int size();
    boolean isEmpty();
    Node<E> root(); //returns root node
    Node<E> parent(Node<E> n); //returns parent of Node n
    Iterable<Node<E>> children(Node<E> n); //collection of all the children of Node n
    int numChildren(Node<E> n);
    Iterator<E> iterator(); //an iterator over the trees elements
    Iterator<Node<E>> nodes(); //collection of all the nodes
    boolean isInternal(Node<E> n); //does the node have at least one child
    boolean isExternal(Node<E> n); //does the node have no children
    boolean isRoot(Node<E> n); //is the node the root

}

```
**Traversal**
- Preorder traversal :: Create a copy of the tree, get prefix expressions.
- Inorder traversal :: Tree in ascending order.
- Postorder traversal :: Delete the tree or get a postfix expression.

---
**Preorder Traversal**
- Explore all internal nodes before leaves.
```
Algorithm Preorder(Node node)
   1. Check whether node is null or not, if so return.
   2. Print the node.
   3. Traverse the left subtree, i.e., call Preorder(node.left)
   4. Traverse the right subtree, i.e., call Preorder(node.right) 
```

**Inorder Traversal**
```
Algorithm Inorder(Node node)
   1. Check whether node is null or not, if so return.
   2. Traverse the left subtree, i.e., call Preorder(node.left)
   3. Print the node.
   4. Traverse the right subtree, i.e., call Preorder(node.right) 
```


**Postorder Traversal**
- Explore all leaves before internal nodes.
```
Algorithm Postorder(Node node)
   1. Check whether node is null or not, if so return.
   2. Traverse the left subtree, i.e., call Preorder(node.left)
   3. Traverse the right subtree, i.e., call Preorder(node.right) 
   4. Print the node.
```

---

## BT

A binary tree, BT, is a non-linear data structure where each node can have at most 2 children nodes.
The right and left children of each parent node are ordered pairs where the left child is less than the right one.

A binary tree satisifes the properties:
- $e = i + 1$
- $n = 2e − 1$
- $h \leq i$
- $h \leq (n−1)/2$
- $e \leq 2^h$ 
- $h \geq log_2e$
- $h \geq log_2(n + 1) -1$

where:
- $n$ is the number of nodes in the tree
- $e$ is the number of external nodes (no children/leaves)
- $i$ is the number of internal nodes
- $h$ is the height/max depth of the tree

**Interface**

```java
public interface BinaryTree<E> extends Tree<E>{
    Node<E> left(Node<E> n); //returns the left child of n
    Node<E> right(Node<E> n); //returns the right child of n
    Node<E> sibling(Node<E> n); //returns the sibling of n
}

```

**Implementation**

- Binary trees can be represented in a linked structure, similar to a linked list.
- Node objects are positions in a tree, the same as positions in a positional list.
- Each node is represented by an object that stores
  - The element
  - A pointer to the parent node
  - A pointer to the left child node
  - A pointer to the right child node

- A binary tree could also be represented as an array storing level positions of nodes fom left to right in increasing order.
  - The numbers may not be consective because the representaion depends on potential values and will skip some numbers e.g. if a node/leaf doesn't have children.
  - The root is zero, if the level number is odd then its a left child and otherwise right child.

The array-based representation of a binary tree is especially suitable for a complete binary tree. We recall that in this implementation, the elements of the tree are stored in an array-based list A such that the element at position p is stored in A with index equal to the level number f(p) of p, defined as follows:
- If $p$ is the root, then $f(p) = 0$.
- If $p$ is the left child of position $q$, then $f(p) = 2 \cdot f(q) + 1$.
- If $p$ is the right child of position $q$, then $f(p) = 2 \cdot f(q) + 2$.

- In the worst case we need $2^n - 1$ space to represent a BT as an array.

## BST
- BSTs are ordered with some internal logic hence are more efficient in insertion, deletion, and searching compared to BTs.
- Binary search performs nearest neighbor queries in $O(logn)$ complexity when the tree is balanced. At each step, the decision space halves.
- Insertion and removal take $O(h)$ time.

**Operations, Performance, and a Generic Implementation**

**Nodes**

```java
class Node<T>
{
	T data;
	Node<T> left, right;

	Node(T data) {
		this.data = data;
	}

  ...
}
```

The common operations of a BST:
- Initialization $O(1)$
- Insert a node $O(1) to O(h)$
- Search for a node, given some key $O(1) to O(h)$
- Delete a node $O(1) to O(h)$
- Inorder, Postorder, Preorder traversals $O(n)$.


**Search**
```java
// A utility function to search a given key in BST
public Node search(Node root, int key)
{
    // Base Cases: root is null or key is present at root
    if (root==null || root.key==key)
        return root;
 
    // Key is greater than root's key
    if (root.key < key)
       return search(root.right, key);
 
    // Key is smaller than root's key
    return search(root.left, key);
}
```


---
**Insert**
Similar to the search function, start at the node and find a place to insert the current node.
- If the node to be inserted is ever found on the tree, a decision can be made to insert the duplicate or not based on the context of implementation.

```java
  private Node<T> insert(Node<T> node, T data)
	{
		if (node == null) {
			return new Node<T>(data);
		}
		else if (data.compareTo(node.data) < 0) {
			root.left = insert(node.left, data);
		}
		else if (data.compareTo(node.data) > 0) {
			root.right = insert(node.right, data);
		}
		else {
      // duplicate node in tree
		}

		return node;
	}
```

---
**Deletion**
There are three possible cases:
- The node has no subtree: delete the node and its done.
- The node has a single subtree: Delete the node and connect the child node to the delete node's position.
- The node has two subtrees: Delete the node and replace its position with the inorder successor of the right node of the deleted node. E.g.

              50                            60
           /     \         delete(50)      /   \
          40      70       --------->    40    70 
                 /  \                            \ 
                60   80                           80


```java
	private Node<T> delete(Node<T> root, T data)
	{
		if (root == null) {
			return null;
		}
		else if (data.compareTo(root.data) < 0 ) {
			root.left = delete(root.left, data);
		} 
    else if (data.compareTo(root.data) > 0) {
			root.right = delete(root.right, data);
		}
    else {
			// if the node has no children, then return a value of null
			if (root.left == null && root.right == null) {
				return null;
			}
			// if the node has a left child, but no right child, then return the left child
			else if (root.right == null) {
				return root.left;
			}
			// if the node has a right child, but no left child, then return the right child
			else if (root.left == null) {
				return root.right;
			}
			// if the node has two children, then set the node's data to be the largest element
			// in the left sub-tree of the node, and then set the left child's data to be equal to
			// whatever data is returned when deleting the new root data from the left sub-tree
			// (i.e., the data that is currently set in the left child)
			else
			{
				root.data = findMax(root.left);
				root.left = delete(root.left, root.data);
			}
		}

		return root;
	}

  // This method assumes root is non-null, since this is only called by
	// delete() on the left subtree, and only when that subtree is non-empty.
	private T findMax(Node<T> root)
	{
		// simply continue traversing to the right until you can't go no mo', and then you've found the largest element.
		while (root.right != null) {
			root = root.right;
		}

		return root.data;
	}
```
[Full Generic BST Implementation in Java](https://github.com/jnethery/CS2/blob/master/Generic%20Binary%20Search%20Tree/GenericBST.java)
[More Theory](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/binary-search-trees-bst-explained-with-examples/)

---

**Full Performance Analysis**
- Consider a binary search tree with $n$ items and height $h$:
  - The space used is $O(n)$.
  - The methods get, put, remove take $O(h)$ time.
  - The height $h$ is $O(logn)$ in the best case, when the tree is perfectly balanced.
  - In the worst case, when the tree is basically just a linked list, this decays to $O(n)$.

---

## Priority Queue

- Implementation of a queue where each item stored has an assigned priority.
- Collection of prioritized elements that allows arbitrary element insertion, and allows the removal of the element that has first priority. 

  - When an element is added to a priority queue, the user designates its priority by providing an associated key.

**ADT**
```java
public interface PriorityQueue<K,V>{
    int size();
    boolean isEmpty();
    void insert(K key, V value); //inserts a value into the queue with key as its priority
    V removeMin(); //removes the entry with the lowest key (at the front of the queue)
    V min(); //returns but not removes the smallest key entry (peek)
}

```

**Strategies for when there are multiple entries with the same keys**

When there are multiple entries with the same keys, `min` and `removeMin` could return any arbitrary object with that priority. 
The first encountered minimum could be returned, meaning that was the first one inserted with that priority if the list is unsorted.
Include timestamps with priorities and compare timestamps of items when they have the same priority to remove the oldest one.

**Entry Objects**

```java
public class Entry<K,V>{
    private K key;
    private V value;

    public Entry(K key, V value){
        this.key = key;
        this.value = value;
    }

    public K getKey(){
        return key;
    }

    public V getValue(){
        return value;
    }

}
```

- Key is what is used to defined the priority of the item in the queue.
- Value is the queue item.


**Comparable**

A class may define what is known as the natural ordering of its instances by formally implementing the `java.lang.Comparable` interface, which includes a single method, `compareTo`. The syntax `a.compareTo(b)` must return an
integer i with the following meaning:

- i < 0 designates that a < b.
- i = 0 designates that a = b.
- i > 0 designates that a > b.

**Comparator**

```java
public class Comparator<E>{
    public int compare(E a, E b){
        if(a < b)
            return -1;
        if(a > b)
            return 1;
        return 0;
    }
}

```
**Why use comparators?**

We may want to compare objects according to some notion other than their natural ordering.
- A comparator encapsulates the action of comparing two objects with a total order declared on them
  - A priority queue uses a comparator object given to it to compare two keys to decide their priority


- In a generic data structure, it is possible to allow a user to choose any key type and to send an appropriate comparator instance as a parameter to the priority queue constructor. The priority queue will use that comparator anytime it needs to compare two keys to each other.

**Implementations**

- Sorted List 
    - Insertion sort implementation.
    - Improved speed of removal by sorting items are insertion.
    - `insert()` finds the correct place to insert entries and maintains ordering with a linear search for every insertion, $O(n)$
    - `removeMin()` simply removes the head of the list which will be the entry with the lowest key, $O(1)$.

- Unsorted List
  - Selection sort implementation.
  - Simpler implementation. 
  - `insert()` appends an item in $O(1)$ time.
  - `removeMin()` will do a linear search for the smallest key entry and take $O(n)$ time each time.

- Another implementation is using a binary heap which is more efficient than both above in terms of time complexity of operations.

The implementation is picked based on context of use.

**Sorting with a priority queues**

- Selection sort:
  - Enqueue $n$ elements, overall $O(n)$ time where each call to `insert()` takes $O(1)$ time.
  - Dequeue into sorted order, $O(n) + O(n-1) + ... + O(1)$ which adds up to $O(n^2)$.
  - The bottleneck computation is the repeated “selection” of the minimum element.

- Insertion sort:
  - Enqueue $n$ elements, with the total calls taking $O(1) + O(2) + .. + O(n)$ for each $n$ hence $O(n^2)$ time.
  - Dequeue all $n$ items, each taking $O(1)$, taking $O(n)$ time.
  - The bottleneck in this sorting algorithm involves the repeated “insertion" of a new element at the appropriate position in a sorted list.

- Then there is heapsort used along with the better heap implementation which also provides a more efficient route to sorting.

---

## Binary Heaps

A heap is a complete binary tree T that stores entries at its positions, and that satisfies two additional properties:

- **Heap-Order Property:** In a heap T, for every position p other than the root, the key stored at p is greater than the key stored at p’s parent. i.e $key(p) \geq key(parent(p))$ for max heap/otherway for min heap.
- **Complete Binary Tree Property:** A heap T with height h is a complete binary tree if levels $0, 1, 2, ... , h − 1$ of T have the maximal number of nodes possible (namely, for each level $i$, $0 \leq i \leq h − 1$, there are $2^i$ nodes) and the remaining nodes at level h reside in the leftmost possible positions at that level.

A heap T of n entries, has a height of `floor(log n)`.

There are two kinds of heaps, min-heaps and max-heaps:
- For a min-heap, the heap order specifies that for every internal node $v$ other than the root, $v \geq parent(v)$. In other words, the root of the tree/subtree must be the smallest node.
- This property is inverted for max heaps.

---
**Insertion**
Upon insertion of a new node, the heap must be checked such that it still satisfies the heap order and complete BT property. 

- When inserting, to maintain the complete BT property, the new node is always placed in a position beyond the **rightmost node at the bottom level**.
    - This is unless the **bottom level is already full or the heap is null**, in which case the node is placed at the **leftmost position at a new level**.

After this the tree is certainly a complete binary tree; however, the tree must be checked to satisfy the order property. Often if the order is not right an algorithm is applied, called **up-heap bubbling**. This is simply swapping the inserted node with its parent until the property is satisfied.

```
Let x be the inserted node.
Let the heap be a min heap, such that smallest entries are at the top.

While parent(x) > x
  Swap x and parent(x)
```

> For a heap of height h worst case is $O(logn)$.

**Removal**

Removing from a priority queue heap is simply returning of the root from the heap. However, doing this, the complete BT property must be kept satisfied. In order to do this:

1. At the bottom level, the rightmost element replaces the root upon its removal. (Replace the root with the last node and then remove the last node.)
2. After this a **down-heap bubbling algorithm** is applied to restore the order property.

**Down heap bubbling algorithm**
- If the new root is the only internal node then we are done.
- If only one child of the root is internal (it must be the left child) compare its key with the key of the root and swap if needed.
- If both children of the root are internal, choose the child with the smaller key and swap with the root if needed.

```
Let x be the current root.
Let the heap be a min heap.

While x > either of its children
  Swap x with the smallest of the two children
```

Running time of this is $logn$ because the height of the tree is $logn$ for $n$ entries.

**Heap Sort**
Just like treesort we insert $n$ elements with a total relation into the heap then remove all in order. This is an overall $O(nlogn)$ method to add and remove and an improvement of quadratic sorting algorithms.


**Bottom Up Heap Construction**
If we start with an initially empty heap, n successive calls to the insert operation will run in O(nlog n) time in the worst case. However, if all n key-value pairs to
be stored in the heap are given in advance, such as during the first phase of the heap-sort algorithm (introduced in Section 9.4.2), there is an alternative bottom-up construction method that runs in O(n) time.

**Heap priority queue**

Heaps can represent priority queues by storing key value pair entries and sorting/inserting by the total order of keys.
> If we can perform update operations on a heap in time proportional to its height, then those operations will run in logarithmic time. Let us therefore turn to the problem of how to efficiently perform various priority queue methods using a heap.

The creation of a min heap will ensure a sorted priority queue from wich we can do removals from the top of the heap in $O(logn)$ time considering we must `downHeap()` afterwards. 



---

## Skip Lists

Skip lists provide a clever compromise to efficiently support search, sort and
update operations for linked lists.

Fast search is made possible by maintaining a linked hierarchy of subsequences, with each successive subsequence skipping over fewer elements than the previous one.

**Search**
1. Start at the first position of the top list.
2. At the current position, check if below is null or not, to decide whether to terminate the search or just move below.
3. Scan forward to the next node in current row and check if key(p) <= k
4. Traverse from step 2.

```
Let k be the key searched for.
Let p be the starting position.

While below(p) != null do
  p = below(p)
  While k >= key(next(p)) do
    p = next(p)
    if k == p.value then return p
return null
```

As it turns out, the expected running time of algorithm SkipSearch on a skip list with n entries is $O(logn)$.

**Insert**

To insert an element k into the list:

- Make a call to a call to `search(k)` to get the position p of the bottom-level entry with the largest key less than or equal to k. If $key(p) = k$, the associated value is overwritten with v.
  - We insert (k,v) immediately after position p within $S_0$.
- We use randomization to decide the height of the tower for the new entry.
  - Repeatedly toss a fair coin until tails comes up
  - let $i$ be the number of times the coin came up heads
  - If $i \geq h$, add new lists $S_{h+1},...,S_{i+1}$ with each one containing only the sentinels.
- For $j=0..i$, insert k into list $S_j$ after position $p_j$
	
 
**Removal**

Remove an element x from the lists:

- Search for x, `search(x)` and get the positions of the items $p_0,p_1,...,p_i$.
- Remove them from the lists $S_0, S_1,...,S_i$
- Remove repeating empty lists that are not the topmost one.

**Implementation**
A skip list can be implemented using quad-nodes, where each node stores
- It's item/element
- A pointer to the node above
- A pointer to the node below
- A pointer to the next node
- A pointer to the previous node

**Performance**
- The space used by a skip list depends on the random number on each invocation of the insertion algorithm
  - On average, the expected space usage of a skip list with n items is $O(n)$.
- The run time of the insertion is affected by the height h of the skip list
  - A skip list with n items has average height $O(logn)$.
- The search time in a skip list is proportional to the number of steps taken
- The drop-down steps are bounded by the height of the list
- The scan-forward steps are bounded by the length of the list
  - Both are $O(logn)$.
- Insertion and deletion are also both $O(logn)$.

[Wiki Skip List](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skip_list)

---

## Self Balancing Trees

### [AVL-Trees](https://www.baeldung.com/java-avl-trees)
This is a way of implementing a [self-balancing BST](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/self-balancing-binary-search-trees-comparisons/). The goal is to add some sort of correction function that helps maintain a logarithmic height for the tree.

> The height of a subtree rooted at position p of a tree is the number of edges on the longest path from p to a leaf.

AVL trees satsify the following property:
- Height-Balance Property: For every internal position p of T, the heights of the children of p differ by at most 1.

The height of an AVL tree storing n entries is $O(logn)$.

**Insertion**

This is the same as inserting into a BST. However, after insertion we need to balance the potentially unbalanced tree. 

To do this we use a method called trinode reconstruction. This finds the unbalanced subtree and its two ancestor nodes, (x,y,z) and makes y the new root.

There are four unbalanced cases:
1. Left Left: right rotate
2. Left Right: left rotate then right rotate
3. Right Right: left rotate
4. Right Left: right rotate then left rotate

```java
/** After insertion : BALANCING */

    /** Update height of this ancestor node */
    root.height = 1 + max(height(root.left), height(root.right));

    /** Get the balance factor of this ancestor
    node to check whether this node became
    unbalanced */
    int balance = getBalance(root);

    /** If this node becomes unbalanced, then there
    are 4 cases. */
    /** Left Left Case */
    if (balance > 1 && comparator.compare(data,root.left.data) < 0 )
        return rightRotate(root);

    /** Right Right Case */
    if (balance < -1 && comparator.compare(data,root.right.data) > 0 )
        return leftRotate(root);

    /** Left Right Case */
    if (balance > 1 && comparator.compare(data,root.left.data) > 0 ) {
        root.left = leftRotate(root.left);
        return rightRotate(root);
    }

    /** Right Left Case */
    if (balance < -1 && comparator.compare(data,root.right.data) < 0 ) {
        root.right = rightRotate(root.right);
        return leftRotate(root);
    }
 
```

**Removal**

Same as BST followed by balancing:

The same method of trinode reconstruction happens, all ancestors, moving up the tree, are checked for imbalances.

```java
 /** Update height of the current node. */ 
    root.height = max(height(root.left), height(root.right)) + 1;  


    /** Check if the current node has been unbalanced */ 
    int balance = getBalance(root);  

    /** Check the 4 cases and rotate accordingly to balance. */
    if (balance > 1 && getBalance(root.left) >= 0)  
        return rightRotate(root);  
 
    if (balance > 1 && getBalance(root.left) < 0)  
    {  
        root.left = leftRotate(root.left);  
        return rightRotate(root);  
    }  

    if (balance < -1 && getBalance(root.right) <= 0)  
        return leftRotate(root);  

    if (balance < -1 && getBalance(root.right) > 0)  
    {  
        root.right = rightRotate(root.right);  
        return leftRotate(root);  
    }  
 

```

[AVL Tree implementation in java](https://github.com/TomasZorvan/avlTree)

---

## Graphs

A graph $G = (V, E)$ is a pair where $V$ is a set of nodes and $E$ is a collection of edges (indicated by pairs of vertices).

- Directed graph - has all edges as ordered pairs of vertices $(u, v)$ indicating a connection from source to destination ONLY.
- Undirected graph - unordered pair of vertices $\{u, v\}$ are bidirectionally connected.

| Term  |  Description |
|---|---|
|Adjacent Vertices   | Vertices with an edge between them  |
|Edges incident on a vertex   | Edges which both connect to the same vertex  |
|End vertices/endpoints   |The two vertices in the pair that an edge connects to   |
|Degree of a vertex   |The number of edges that connect to a pair   |
|Parallel edges   |Two edges both connecting the same nodes (This is the reason why edges are an unordered collection, not a set)   |
|Self-loop   |An edge whose vertices are both the same   |
|Path   | A sequence of alternating vertices and edges, starting and ending in a vertex  |
|Simple paths   |Paths containing no repeating vertices (hence are acyclic)   |
|Cycle   |A path starting and ending at the same vertex   |
|Acyclic   |A graph containing no cycles   |
|Simple cycle   |A path where the only repeated vertex is the starting/ending one   |
|Length (of a path of cycle)   |The number of edges in the path/cycle   |
	
---

**Some Properties**

- The sum of the degrees of the vertices in an undirected graph is an even number.
  - Handshaking Theorem. Every edge must connect two vertices, so sum of degrees is twice the number of edges, which must be even.

- An undirected graph with no self loops nor parallel edges, with number of edges $m$ and number of vertices $n$ fulfils the property $m \leq \frac{n\cdot (n-1)}{2}$
  - The first vertex can connect to $n-1$ vertices (all vertices bar itself), then the second can connect to $n-2$ (all the vertices bar itself and the first vertex, which it is already connected to), and so on, giving the sum $1 + 2 + ... + n$.

---
**Graph ADT**

> Graphs are a collection of vertices and edges.

We model 3 data types as Vertex, Edge, and Graph.

- Vertex:
  - Stores some arbitrary element.
  - Reference to position in vertex sequence.
- Edge:
  - Associated Vertex objects as a source and destination.
  - Reference to position in edge sequence.
- Graph:
  - Representation of the two, can be directed or undirected.
  - Adjacency matrix, Adjacency list.

---
**Adjacency List**

This is n incidence sequence for each vertex in a graph. It is preffered in modelling more sparse graphs.

**Adjacency Matrix**

This is a 2-D array of all nodes and the incident edges in between.
- 2D array acts a lookup table for whether vertices have an edge connecting them.
- Undirected graphs are symmetrical along the leading diagonal.

**Matrix or List?**
- An adjacency list is a better option in terms of space complexity in some cases. This is because only the existing edges will be represented through a linked list of adjacent nodes to each node in the graph. This is $O(n+m)$ space complexity for n nodes and m edges. This may not e the best choice where there are a large number of edges as there may be many adjacencies and a large number of nodes will be repeated in the linked lists for each node in the graph.
- On the other hand, a matrix representation is usually used for more dense graphs with many edges as there will be a space complexity of $O(n^2)$ where even unexisting nodes must be represented (with a null or -1 symbol) but with no repeated representations.

> When given a graph with n nodes and m edges, if n is a large number and m is not close to the sum $1+2+...+n$ then consider a list representation to avoid wasted space.


**Subgraph**

A graph S is a subgraph of G if:
- The edges of S are a subset of the edges in G.
- The vertices in S are a subset of the vertices in G.

> A spanning subgraph contains all of the vertices in G.
 A spanning tree of a connected graph is a spanning subgraph that is a tree.


## Depth First Search

> Depth-first search (DFS) is a general technique for traversing a graph. DFS on a graph with $n$ vertices and $m$ edges takes $O(n + m)$ time. 

The algorithm starts at the root node (selecting some arbitrary node as the root node in the case of a graph) and explores as far as possible along each branch before backtracking.

**Algorithm**
 - So the basic idea is to start from the root or any arbitrary node and mark the node and move to the adjacent unmarked node and continue this loop until there is no unmarked adjacent node.
 - Then backtrack and check for other unmarked nodes and traverse them.
 - Finally print the nodes in the path.

1. Create a recursive function that takes the index of node and a visited array.
2. Mark the current node as visited and print the node.
3. Traverse all the adjacent and unmarked nodes and call the recursive function with index of adjacent node.

```java
    void DFSUtil(int v, boolean visited[])
    {
        // Mark the current node as visited and print it
        visited[v] = true;
        System.out.print(v + " ");
 
        // Recur for all the vertices adjacent to this
        // vertex
        Iterator<Integer> i = adj[v].listIterator();
        while (i.hasNext())
        {
            int n = i.next();
            if (!visited[n])
                DFSUtil(n, visited);
        }
    }
```

It has the following properties:

- It visits all vertices and edges in any connected component of a graph.
- The discovery edges form a spanning tree of any graph it traverses.
- The depth-first search tree of a complete graph is a path.

**Analysis**
- Each vertex in the graph has incident edges that are visited (called recursively) hence for n edges m incidents are traversed. We have an overall $O(V + E)$ algorithm.
- Space complexity is $O(V)$


**Uses**
- Path finding
  - Given a graph and two nodes in the graph to find the path between, `DFSpath(G,u,v)` we push each visited node from u into a stack and return the contents of the stack once v is reached.

```java
    static void DFS(boolean vis[], int x, int y, Vector<Integer> stack)
    {
        stack.push(x);
        if (x == y)
        {
           
            // print the path and return on
            // reaching the destination node
            printPath(stack);
            return;
        }
        vis[x] = true;
       
        // if backtracking is taking place     
        if (v.get(x).size() > 0)
        {
            for(int j = 0; j < v.get(x).size(); j++)
            {
               
                // if the node is not visited
                if (vis[v.get(x).get(j)] == false)
                {
                    DFS(vis, v.get(x).get(j), y, stack);
                }
            }
        }
         
        stack.pop();
    }
```
- Cycle finding
  - There is a cycle in a graph only if there is a back edge present in the graph. A back edge is an edge that is joining a node to itself (self-loop) or one of its ancestor in the tree produced by DFS. 
  - In brief terms, if a node has been visited befire and it is not the parent node then there was a cycle.

```java
    Boolean isCyclicUtil(int v,
                 Boolean visited[], int parent)
    {
        // Mark the current node as visited
        visited[v] = true;
        Integer i;
 
        // Recur for all the vertices
        // adjacent to this vertex
        Iterator<Integer> it = adj[v].iterator();
        while (it.hasNext())
        {
            i = it.next();
 
            // If an adjacent is not
            // visited, then recur for that
            // adjacent
            if (!visited[i])
            {
                if (isCyclicUtil(i, visited, v))
                    return true;
            }
 
            // If an adjacent is visited
            // and not parent of current
            // vertex, then there is a cycle.
            else if (i != parent)
                return true;
        }
        return false;
    }
```

- For an unconnected graph, we loop over all unvisited nodes in the entire set of nodes in order to traverse each component of the whole graph.

## Breath First Search

> It starts at the root or some node of the graph, and explores all of the neighbor nodes at the present depth prior to moving on to the nodes at the next depth level.

The algorithm is as so:
1. Start from a root node, mark it visited and queue it.
2. While the queue is not empty print and dequeue the head of the queue and then queue up every adjacent node to the dequeued node, marking it as visited.

```java
    void BFS(int s)
    {
        // Mark all the vertices as not visited(By default
        // set as false)
        boolean visited[] = new boolean[V];
 
        // Create a queue for BFS
        LinkedList<Integer> queue = new LinkedList<Integer>();
 
        // Mark the current node as visited and enqueue it
        visited[s]=true;
        queue.add(s);
 
        while (queue.size() != 0)
        {
            // Dequeue a vertex from queue and print it
            s = queue.poll();
            System.out.print(s+" ");
 
            // Get all adjacent vertices of the dequeued vertex s
            // If a adjacent has not been visited, then mark it
            // visited and enqueue it
            Iterator<Integer> i = adj[s].listIterator();
            while (i.hasNext())
            {
                int n = i.next();
                if (!visited[n])
                {
                    visited[n] = true;
                    queue.add(n);
                }
            }
        }
    }
```

It has the following properties

- It visits all vertices and edges in any connected component of a graph.
- The discovery edges form a spanning tree of any graph it traverses.
- The path between any two vertices in the spanning tree of discovery edges it creates is the shortest path between them in the graph

**Uses**
- Compute the connected components of G (call BFS/DFS for each unvisited node of a graph.)
- Compute a spanning forest of G
- Find a simple cycle in G, or report that G is a forest
- Given two vertices of G, find a path in G between them with the minimum number of edges, or report that no such path exists.


## Further Algorithms

### Sorting

- Classification of sorting algorithms and their criteria [HERE](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/classification-of-sorting-algorithms/):
  - Time complexity (average, best, and worst)
  - Method/paradigm: partitioning, divide and conquer.
  - Recursion type or iterative
  - Stability - whether two elements with equal values appear in the same order in output as it was in the input. i.e. bubble sort, insertion sort, radix sort.
  - Sort in place or not, space complexity/memory usage.
  - Adaptability - the complexity changes based on pre-sorted input; i.e. quicksort.

**Insertion Sort**
```java
	void sort(int arr[]) 
	{ 
		int n = arr.length; 
		for (int i = 1; i < n; ++i) { 
			int key = arr[i]; 
			int j = i - 1; 

			/* Move elements of arr[0..i-1], that are 
			greater than key, to one position ahead 
			of their current position */
			while (j >= 0 && arr[j] > key) { 
				arr[j + 1] = arr[j]; 
				j = j - 1; 
			} 
			arr[j + 1] = key; 
		} 
	} 
```

**Insertion sort with priority queue**

- This algorithm sorts the list during insertion of entries into the queue, then dequeues the sorted list back into the list.

```java
Algorithm PriorityQueueSort(S, P):
	Input: A sequence S storing n elements, on which a
	total order relation is defined, and a Priority Queue
	P that compares keys with the same relation
	Output: The Sequence S sorted by the total order
	relation
	
	while !S.isEmpty() do
		e ← S.removeFirst()
		P.insertItemInOrder(e, e)  // o(n)
	while P is not empty do
		e ← P.removeMinElementFromHead() // o(1)
		S.insertLast(e)

```
**Selection Sort**
```java
   void sort(int arr[])
    {
        int n = arr.length;
  
        // One by one move boundary of unsorted subarray
        for (int i = 0; i < n-1; i++)
        {
            // Find the minimum element in unsorted array
            int min_idx = i;
            for (int j = i+1; j < n; j++)
                if (arr[j] < arr[min_idx])
                    min_idx = j;
  
            // Swap the found minimum element with the first
            // element
            int temp = arr[min_idx];
            arr[min_idx] = arr[i];
            arr[i] = temp;
        }
    }
```
**Selection Sort with priority queue**

- This algorithm queues up the entire unsorted list and sorts the list as it does a linear search to remove minimum entries from the queue since it remains unsorted.

```java
Algorithm PriorityQueueSort(S, P):
	Input: A sequence S storing n elements, on which a
	total order relation is defined, and a Priority Queue
	P that compares keys with the same relation
	Output: The Sequence S sorted by the total order
	relation
	
	while !S.isEmpty() do
		e ← S.removeFirst()
		P.insertItemAppend(e, e) // o(1)
	while P is not empty do
		e ← P.removeMinElementSearch()  // o(n)
		S.insertLast(e)

```


**MergeSort**
- Divide and conquer approach.
- Divide array into half until we get singletons and merge by making comparisons and sorting the list.
- Stable.

```
MergeSort(arr[], l,  r)
If r > l
     1. Find the middle point to divide the array into two halves:  
             middle m = l+ (r-l)/2
     2. Call mergeSort for first half:   
             Call mergeSort(arr, l, m)
     3. Call mergeSort for second half:
             Call mergeSort(arr, m+1, r)
     4. Merge the two halves sorted in step 2 and 3:
             Call merge(arr, l, m, r)
```

[Implementation](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/merge-sort/)
```java
Let arr <- the array to sort

Function mergeSort(arr)
	If arr contains only one element
		Return arr
    Let lArr, rArr <- arr split into two even halves
    Return merge(
    	mergeSort(lArr),
    	mergeSort(rArr)
    )
    
Function merge(arr1, arr2)
	Let arr' <- an empty array large enough to fit both arr1 and arr2 in
	Let n1, n2 <- 0
	While neither arr1 nor arr2 are empty
		If arr1[n1] = arr2[n2]
			Append arr1[n1] and arr2[n2] to arr'
			Increment n1 and n2
		Else if arr1[n1] < arr2[n2]
			Append arr1[n1] to arr'
			Increment n1
		Else (if arr1[n1] > arr2[n2])
			Append arr2[n2] to arr'
			Increment n2
	For each element in arr1 from n1 to its last element
		Append arr1[n1] to arr'
	For each element in arr2 from n2 to its last element
		Append arr2[n2] to arr'
	Return arr'
```

- Time complexity: Worst, best, average: $O(nlogn)$.
- Space/memory usage: $O(n)$ for arrays.
- 


**Worst case for merge sort**
```
Applying Merge Sort using Divide and Conquer

Input array arr[] = [4,0,6,2,5,1,7,3]
                           /  \
                          /    \
                  [4,0,6,2] and [5,1,7,3]
                     / \           / \
                    /   \         /   \
                 [4,0] [6,2]    [5,1] [7,3]       Every pair of 2 will be compared atleast once therefore maximum comparison here
                   |     |        |     |
                   |     |        |     |
                 [0,4] [2,6]    [1,5] [3,7]      Maximum Comparison:Every pair of set is used in comparison     
                   \     /        \     /                        
                    \   /          \   /
                 [0,2,4,6]      [1,3,5,7]        Maximum comparison again: Every pair of set compared
                      \             /
                       \           / 
                     [0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7]   
```

**QuickSort**

QuickSort is a Divide and Conquer algorithm. It picks an element as pivot and partitions the given array around the picked pivot. There are many different versions of quickSort that pick pivot in different ways. 

A divide-and-conquer algorithm recursively breaks down a problem into two or more sub-problems of the same or related type, until these become simple enough to be solved directly. The solutions to the sub-problems are then combined to give a solution to the original problem (conquer). Examples of divide and conquer are quicksort,mergesort but not binary search. Binary search divides the problem into sub problems but the divisions are discarded and are not a part of the solution//thedecision space is smaller by $2^n$ for the nth division.

E.g. we could pick the last element as the pivot:

```
quickSort(arr[], low, high)
{
    if (low < high)
    {
        /* pi is partitioning index, arr[pi] is now
           at right place */
        pi = partition(arr, low, high);

        quickSort(arr, low, pi - 1);  // Before pi
        quickSort(arr, pi + 1, high); // After pi
    }
}


partition (arr[], low, high)
{
    // pivot (Element to be placed at right position)
    pivot = arr[high];  
 
    i = (low - 1)  // Index of smaller element and indicates the 
                   // right position of pivot found so far

    for (j = low; j <= high- 1; j++)
    {
        // If current element is smaller than the pivot
        if (arr[j] < pivot)
        {
            i++;    // increment index of smaller element
            swap arr[i] and arr[j]
        }
    }
    swap arr[i + 1] and arr[high])
    return (i + 1)
}
```

- `parition()` picks a pivot and loops the given array to put the pivot in its right plcae in the array with all elements less than the pivot before it and greater than coming after.


**Analysis**
- Worst Case: The worst case occurs when the partition process always picks greatest or smallest element as pivot. If we consider above partition strategy where last element is always picked as pivot, the worst case would occur when the array is already sorted in increasing or decreasing order. This is $O(n^2)$
- The best case occurs when the partition process always picks the middle element/median as pivot.
- Overall in the average cases we have $O(nLogn)$

- Worst case is usually easily fixable and the occurance of the cases are rare


**Randomized partitioning**
>  Randomized quick sort helps in avoiding the worst case time complexity of O(n2) which occurs in case when the input array is already sorted. However the average case and best case time complexities remain unaltered. We minimize the chances of worst case partitioning.


**Comparison with merge sort**

- Quick Sort in its general form is an in-place sort (i.e. it doesn’t require any extra storage) whereas merge sort requires O(N) extra storage, N denoting the array size which may be quite expensive. Allocating and de-allocating the extra space used for merge sort increases the running time of the algorithm.
- Quick Sort is also tail recursive, therefore tail call optimizations is done for stack frames.
- Quicksort is preffered using arrays, mergesort preffered using linked lists.

---

## Greedy Algorithms

A greedy algorithm is any algorithm that follows the problem-solving heuristic of making the locally optimal choice at each stage. In many problems, a greedy strategy does not usually produce an optimal solution, but nonetheless, a greedy heuristic may yield locally optimal solutions that approximate a globally optimal solution in a reasonable amount of time.

Some examples of problems solved involve problems to do with finding a minimum or maximum value, Djikstra shortest path, Travelling salesman problem, Graph coloring, etc.











