

# Introduction
Contemporary multilevel machines can be described to briefly have the following components:

**Digital logic -> Microarhitecture -> Instruction set architecture -> OS level -> Assembly level -> Problem oriented language level**

- The logic level entails the use of logic gates, transistors to model digital devices that take digital inputs and compute outputs, store memory in groups (registers) - and so on.

- Microarchitecture level entails e.g. the ALU, microprograms (fetch execute).

- The instruction set level, individual to the architecture of the computer system, describes the instructions realized by the microprograms that control the CPU of a computer.

- The OS level abstracts the internal workings of the computer in the levels below. It is essentially a bridge between user friendly programs written in the levels above and the machine code executions carried out (through the use of compiler/interpreter/assemblers).

---

# Representation

**Value is independent of representation.**

We can have different bases, values availale to use in a representation. Base 10, the commonly used base, has numbers 0 to 9; we can also have base 2 (0 and 1), base 8 (0 to 7), base 16 (0 to 9 and A to F)...

---
Base 2 terms:

- bit - binary value o or 1
- byte - 8 bits
- word - number of bits a machine can process simultaneously
- 4 bits/nibble - half a byte
- MSB/LSB - highest and lowest place values in a word (LSB starts from the right usually)


**Why do we need different representations?**

Every representation has its own use. E.g. we often use binary when dealing with computer systems, we may decide to make use of e.g. hexadecimal to represent binary values more compactly.

- Representations simply differ in number of characters used to represent.

e.g. 3 bits in binary is a large single symbol in octal, 4 bits in binary is a single symbol in hexadecimal. Essentially, there are cases where it might be useful to represent numbers more compactly hence we might store them as octal or hexadecimal instead of pure binary. Compresses representation. Binary is hard to read and remember compared to e.g. hex hence why assembly is a higher level language than machine code and more writeable and readable by humans.


---

# Binary

**Why is binary used when dealing with computer systems?**
Computers work with transistors, TTL logic, which work over a range of voltages (often 0-5V). We abstract the voltage levels of transistors into on and off states (0-0.8V) to represent 0 and (2.8-5) to represent 1 where a voltage in between is known as the forbidden zone.

Most importantly, this representation is known to achieve noise immunity where natural fluctuations of voltages don't affect the representation of bits in the computer's logic.

---


- a group of n bits can be arranged into $2^n$ patterns with no intrinsic value but meaning given by the programmer//instruction set used.
- bits can be encodings e.g. ASCII/Unicode/bitmaps to represent different data.


---


**Computation**
- Addition in binary can lead to overflow.
- Subtraction in binary can be the addition of the negative representation of a value to subtract it from some other value (E.g. A - B can be A + (-B)) OR BUILD A SUBTRACTOR?

**Representing negative values**

- Signed binary refers to the addition of an extra bit (MSB) to the representation, 0 or 1, to indicate for negative or positive values. (Not widely used as it stores redundant bits and required additional adder/subtractor circuits.) This represents $-2^{n-1}\ to\ 2^{n-1}$ for n bits and has two representations of 0 $1000$ and $0000$.

- Two's complement - the sign on the value is an integral part of the representation. The MSB is negative and represents more numbers - which has an asymmetric range where we can represent $-2^{n-1}\ to\ 2^{n-1}-1$ and also represent a unique zero.

# Decimal representation in binary

- Fixed point - We add a fixed point in a binary representation in which from that point the right side are negative powers of two and left side remains as usual. While this works, and is not particularly computationally demanding, problems will arise with precision and range of representations because no matter how large or small your number is, it will always use the same number of bits for each portion; hence why we simply will not be able to represent some numbers and just approximates of them.

Instead we have:
- Floating point representations allow both large and small values to be written succintly. We express values as a mantissa (value precision) multiplied by some exponent (range/magnitude of values). This allows for larger ranges to be represented and greater precision - often with a trade off between the two (allocating bits from exponent to mantissa and vice versa).

In terms of the portability issue of calculating floating points on different processors - we use a standard, IEEE 754.
E.g.
- The IEEE 754 standard gives 32 bits for a single float, 64 bits for a double, and 128 bits for a quad. For a single precision float, 1 bit is the sign, 8 bits for the exponent and 23 bits for the mantissa.

Floating vs fixed point is a matter of speed or precision.

| Floating point  |  Fixed point  |
|---|---|
| Represent values within a varying, often greater range.  | Values that can be represented are in a specific range.  |
| More time to compute floating point due to exponenet calc.   | The point is fixed and less time to compute. |

---

# Digital Logic

A digital circuit is one in which only two logical values are present.

Tiny electronic devices, called gates, can compute various functions of these two-valued signals. These gates form the hardware basis on which all digital computers are built.

All modern digital logic ultimately rests on the fact that a transistor can be made to operate as a very fast binary switch.


**Universal and Fundamental gates**

- AND, OR, and NOT are fundamental gates.
- NAND and NOR gates require two transistors each, whereas the AND and OR gates require three each. NAND and NOR gates can be used to make any logic gate.

**Simplifying Logic**

We often want to simplify expressions as possible, because simplifying expressions leads to less logic gates, which is cheaper. (Also, simplifying to one universal gate can also be cheaper due to economy of scale of buying only one gate.)

# Boolean Algebra and K-Maps

K-maps, Karnaugh maps, can be used to simplify logic expressions. K-maps use Gray code, binary representation with a Hamming distance of 1 and hence a ’cyclic’ property, and can be visualized as a torus shape. The trick is that successive 1s in the map can be grouped into powers of two to obtain a simplified logical expression through the sum of products.

The minimum number of groupings suggest the most optimal solution. In cases where the exclusive OR operator is involved we usually lack a way to find this "efficient solution".

**Kmaps vs BA**
Kmaps have certain advantages over boolean algebra when simplifying expressions. They allow a quick way to find the simplest expression possible through groupings. Not only is boolean algebra tedious and doesn't make it easy to get to the minimal solution - kmaps are a quicker, straightforward way to do the same job. Kmaps are not good when there are too many variables though.

Don't care conditions, denoted `x` usually, refer to the value of the input not having any effect on the output such that it is simply independent of the calculation. E.g. if a clear line is on the inputs to a circuit are all don't care conditions since output will be cleared now regardless of input.


---

# Combinatorial/Combinational Circuits

Refers to circuits with multiple inputs and uniquely determined outputs that are time-independent and are the result of pure function calculations. These circuits hold no memory and only spit some output when given input at any point in time.

E.g. the ALU is constructed using mostly combinational circuits such as half/full adders/subtractors, MUX, DMUX, encoders, decoders, etc...

- **Half adder**

This can add two bits and produce carry bits - but not carry bits to the right of the sum.

- **Full adder**

This takes a carry in bit into the sum, hence n many of these full adders can be connected in series to take the carry output  of one adder as the carry in input to another and allow the addition of n bits together.

- **Subtractor / Adder**

An n bit subtractor/adder incorporates a control line and XOR gates connected to each B input where depending on the control input being 0 or 1 we get either an adder or subtractor, respectively. When the control bit is 1, essentially, the  input is converted into its two's complement equivalent - hence we perform an addition on its negative value ($A + (-B)$).


---

# MSI - medium scale integration // Integrated Circuits

**DECODER**
- A circuit for encoding n binary inputs into $2^n$ discrete outputs; selecting a single one of the outputs as the active one - depending on the input given.

**ENCODER**
- Takes a series of inputs and encodes them into defined outputs; n to $2^n$.

**MUX**
- This is a data selector which essentially, given $2^n$ inputs and n select lines outputs a single value - which is the selected one.

**DMUX**
- This is the opposite of a MUX, where given 1 input, n select lines and $2^n$ output lines, directs the output to the selected output line.

Multiplexer uses:

- source selection control.
- share one communication line between multiple senders.
- parralel to serial conversion.


---

# Sequential Logic

A sequential logic circuit is a circuit whose outputs are logical functions of inputs and current state. It's often used to build memory.

- Digital sequential logic circuits are divided into synchronous and asynchronous types. In synchronous sequential circuits, the state of the device changes only at discrete times in response to a clock signal. In asynchronous circuits the state of the device can change at any time in response to changing inputs.

---
# Flip flops and latches

- **flip flops**
A flip flop is a circuit with two logical states. Latches are often clocked flip flops such that output doesn't depend solely on steady input but also previously stored states.

- **d-type latch**
This is essentially 1 bit memory with an enable line.

- **toggle latch**
Toggles between states.

- **JK latch**
Both stores memory and toggles states.

---

# Registers

- **n bit register**
Stores n bit values in n many d-type latches.

- **shift registers**
shifts bits in a register in whatever mode (SIPO, PISO, PIPO, SISO) or bidirectionally. It's possible to insert something to the left/right and shift the previously existing data to the side.

- **n bit counter**
...

---

# Three state logic

Introduces a third state to logic circuits, denoted "unconnected". This refers to where we get to disconnect input from output, essentially a state that acts like an open switch; such that communcation can happen without collision between subsystems that are part of a main bus for example.

- propagation delay - gates hav a delay in the nanosecond scale, which decreases as distance between gates decreases on ICs.

- IC types range from PLA, PAL, FPGA.


---

# Microprocessor Fundamentals
Microprocessors conrol and perform instructions, implemented with two main key components being the ALU and CU. The CPU handles the fetch decode execute cycle; this is where instructions are fetched from memory, are decoded into recognized operations and executed to change the state of the CPU. Fetch decode execude takes place over several clock cycles.

Feth decode execute components:
- ALU - The Arithmetic Logic Unit is a subcomponent of the microprocessor which performs mathematical and logical operations on data within the microprocessor.
- CU -  decodes program
instructions into a set of signals which cause and control the logistics for the execution of the instruction.
- PC - The program counter is use to keep track of which instruction is next to be executed in the fetch-execute cycle, ensuring the instructions are evaluated in the correct order. In every cycle, it is incremented after the instruction is fetched, so it points to the address of the instruction to be fetched in the next cycle. It can also be moved by jump instructions, to allow control flow.
- IR - most recent instruction fetched. Copied from MAR, this copying is
important, as it means it can be accessed quickly, instead of slower operations of reading the main store, and that in indirect addressing, it is not overwritten by the data retrieved that is needed to perform the instruction.
- MAR - address of region of memory to be accessed
- MDR/MBR - contains data fetched from memory or dtaa ready to be written to memory.

The CPU has its own data registers which reduces dependence on external memory and speeds up fetch time/the instruction cycle.

**SR/CCR**
The status register represents conditions in the ALU. The CCR is the "condition code register" which is used interchangably with status register and is a part of it that is used to store flags and used to facilitiate branching in assembly. The CCR cannot change state due to operations and only the ALU can change it.
- One of the ways it may be used is to indicate to the control unit that an
overflow has occurred in an arithmetic operation on two data values.


**Fetch decode and execute**
**FETCH**
- Retrieve instruction held in memory location specified by PC, copy it to MAR
- Store the instruction in IR.
- Increment PC to point to the next instruction in memory.

**DECODE**
- Retrieved instruction is decoded into opcode and operand by CU 
- Addressing modes read to establish opcode type.

**EXECUTE**
- CU signals functional CPU components such as the ALU for logical operations where required.
- Changes made to status register, ALU, registers, I/O etc.



---
# RTL

This is used to descirbe and better understand the operations of a microprocessor as it carries out the instruction cycle.

E.g. 
Fetch/decode/execute:
- `[MAR] <- [PC]`
- `[MBR] <- [MS([MAR])]`
- `[PC] <- [PC] + 1`
- `[IR] <- [MBR]`
- `CU <- [IR(opcode)]`
...
- `ALU <- [MBR] + D0`
- `[DO] <- ALU`
...


---
# Assembly Language

This is a higher level compared to machine code, allowing human readability and easier programing through memorable mnemonics for instructions in the instruction set of the architecture.

The main aspects of assembly are instructions and addressing modes where instructions tell the processor what to do and adddressing modes tell the processor how to access data or memory locations. It is also possible to set identifiers to memory locations for referral.

Assembly is an overall low level language that allows direct access to the processor and its registers.
The assembly language uses the instruction set of the specific architecture and its possible to call these instructions through mnemonics. The categories of instructions are usually regarding data movement, arithmetic, logic, and branching.

---

Instructions are written in a certain form, E.g.:
`operation.datatype source, destination`
`add.l D0, D1 | Add the value of the D1 register to the D0 register`

- datatypes available are: .b, .w, and .l
- logical operations: AND.B, OR.B, EOR.B, etc...
- branching in assembly is equivalent to GOTO statements where the reference to a label jumps to that point in the program. To do this the CCR is reffered to where a condition is tested before branching to a label. This can be done with the syntax: `Bcc<label>` where cc is a condition code in the CCR.
---

**Subroutines in Assembly**
- Subroutines clean code, makes it readable and reusable.
- Subroutines are useful for frequently used sections of a program.
- Write (and debug) a subroutine once, and use that program code whenever it is needed.

We can use `JSR<name>` and `RTS` to jump to subroutines and return from them. 

JSR pushes the contents of the PC to the call stack and puts the start address of the subroutine in the PC.
Whereas RTS pops the address at the top of the stack (return address) and puts it into the PC.

The stack stores where to return from a subroutine.

**Addressing Modes**

Addressing modes are used to tell the computer where to find the data it needs to operate on.

- Direct addressing is when the address specified is specified by a data or address register that contains the data required.
- Immediate addressing is when the literal value is specified with some operator like # followed by the value (in the 68k architecture we use $ for hex and % for binary values.) 
  - E.g. `add.l D0,#$42 `
- Absolute addressing specifies the location in memory explicitly. This is essentually hardcoding a memory location.
  - `add.l D0, $FFF00 | Add the value at the address FFF00 in the main store to the register D0`
  - This has the disadvantage of the fact the most programs are placed in different places in memory at each run-time, dependent on what other programs the computer is performing at the same time.
- Address register indirect means to take contents of some specified register and use that value as the address at which the data required is.
  - indirect addresses can be operated on -  this means when the value of the address where the value to be found is can be incremented/decremented/offset before that address is accessed.
- Relative addressing, uses no absolute addresses and uses relative addresses that is i.e relative to the current PC. This facilitates position independent code.



---

# The Memory Hierarchy

A memory system must facilitate reading and writing. The choice of memory technology in a particular part of a computer system depends on factors such as:
- frequency of access.
- access time.
- capacity required.
- cost.

The designer's dilemma is finding a way to design memory systems that are of low cost, high capacity, as well as high performance.

A solution is the **memory hierarchy** where memory is seperated into levels depending on access times and capacity.
As you go down the pyramid capacity increases but access times increase. 

**Why do we need a hierarchy of memory?**
- Everything has its own usage in the hierarchy. Fast access from small storage devices makes sense because spatial and temporal locality exists.
- **spatial locality** refers to the observation that if some specific memory location was accessed then it is likely that neary locations will also be accessed in the future. Hence, cache memory facilitates this and provides efficiency to the fetch process of the processor through loading nearby locations into the cache from main memory once some location is accessed. This increases chances of having a cache hit in the near future.
- **temporal locality** refers to the observation that if some memory location was accessed then it will likely be accessed once again later (loop guards in program iterations) hence it will also be stored closer to the processor in cache memory instead of fetching the stored value from main memory every time it is accessed which will take significantly more time due to the difference in distance.

# Cache

> Cache memory is small, fast access storage device mainly for the CPU to access frequently fetched instructions. There are levels to cache memory and they contain most frequent access to relatively less frequent accessed data level 1 to 3 respectively.

**The role of caches**
The role of caches is to improve the performance of fetching data. If there was no cache near the CPU, data would mainly be stored in the MS/ROM and would be accessed each time from a distance. Instead cache faciliatates quicker fetch with the notions of spatial and temporal locality. Over a large number of fetches the improvement is significant.

**Spatial and temporal locality relation to cache memory**
Considering these two concepts are true, cache improves the performance of the CPU by fetching frequently accessed data and data that will probably be accessed in the future from the MS and storing it in its levels. Overall, these concepts mean that memory locations to be accessed are often predictable hence we can prefetch before the CPU will eventually need the data in some instruction.


 Internal memory devices within the computer are semiconductor type memory devices:
 - Random Access Memory (RAM) is temporary data storage.
  - DRAM uses capacitors to store data and is susceptible to charge leaks hence needs to be refreshed periodically.
  - SRAM uses flip flops and is more expensive bu faster.
 - Read Only Memory (ROM) is semi-permanent and non volatile generally; generally designed to read data only and deleting is infeasible. For this reason flash memory and EPROMs were put to use.

# Memory Cell Organization
- Memory chips have sizes WxB where W denotes word size and B denotes number of bits each word uses. 
  - WxB denotes total number of cells the entire chip has.
  - $log_2W$ denotes number of address lines the chip can take to address all W words.
  - Good memory chip designs are squares and not a long line of words with 1 bit each.


**Explanation of memory units**
- A memory cell can store 1 bit of information. A matrix of memroy cells form a memory chip.
- Each row of a memory chip is a word AND all word lines are connected to an address decoder which is connected to a common address bus.
- At any point in time, 1 word line is enabled depending on address on address bus.
- Each column are connected to data input/output lines and a sense/write circuit to read or write to a word.
- For a memory chip we need memory units WxB many, data i/o lines, sense/write for B many bits, address bus, control lines for sense/write. CS line to select a chip.

**Decoding memory addresses**
To minimize or alter to suit some required address decoding space it could be split into sections. Data selectors/MUX could be used for data selection to select bits from each word.

1. Use entire address bus to decode address of some location where each word is in a row.
2. Organize several words in a single row and divide address bus into two groups. One will form row address and second for column address. A row address selects a row of cells accessed in parallel and according to column address only one of the cells are connected to external data line via i/o MUXs.


---
# Error Detection and Correction Codes

> Digital logic gives us a high degree of noise immunity
Immunity collapses once the noise reaches a certain magnitude - our aim 

> Errors could be introduced during the communication of systems due to noise in channels.

- Types of errors include: Single/isolated errors, multiple errors, and burst errors.

- **Parity**
  - (Single error detection) This scheme can be either even or odd parity where we append an extra parity bit to the entire piece of data which will be either a 0 or 1 to make the total number of 1s even or odd; this depends on the selected parity scheme.
    - Parity calculation software - finite state automaton
    - Hardware - Simple, perform better logic circuits XOR.
    - Sender computes parity and appends, reciever computes parity and compares - flags error and requests retransmission if not equal.
    -  if the probability of an error in the channel is low, then the probability of two errors close together is even lower - BUT if urst errors occur parity is useless.
- **Checksums**
  - (Burst error detection) Creates a checksum out of the data to be sent and appends it to the data. The reciever will run the same checksum algorithm when the information is recieved and the result will be compared to the appended checksum by the sender. Depending on the result the reciever will request a retransfer or decide that there was no error during transmission.
    - Arrange message in rows and calculate column checksums and append the value to message. Even number of errors in a column fails but row errors are detected
- **Error Correction Code**
  - Checksums could be calculated for each row and column of a message being sent. Any difference in the checksums after transmission will identify the exact location of the error and can simply be negated in that location to fix the errors where the checksums differ after transmission.
    - Sender calculates row and column parity bits, reciever recomputes rows first then compares to recieved parity bits. If not equal in some row, recompute column bits and compare, where not equal use row column location to invert bit.


---

# I/O Mechanisms

- **Memory Mapped IO MMIO**
  - The address bus is used to address both memory and IO devices.
  - This way the IO device monitors the address bus and responds to any accesses to locations that were assigned to it. As a result the data bus is connected to the hardware register of the device that was accessed.
  - Advantages: no dedicated hardware or sofware being required. All general purpose instructions and addressing modes still being available to the device as it is being accessed and used.
  - Disadvantages: A portion of the address space is reserved for IO devices and hence the overall systems' addressability is reduced.
- **Polled IO**
  - Polling refers to when the computer waits for the readiness state of an external system/device. This synchronizes the external IO device with the computer's clock.
  - Bust-wait polling is when the CPU manually checks an external device for its readiness state. This wastes clcok cycles and relies on the CPU too much.
  - Busy-wait polling with an interleaved is when the computer still periodically checks external devices for readiness states but carries out another useful task when the device is not ready.
  - Advantages: Simple hardware and software.
  - Disadvantages: Wastes clock cycles. Interleaving a task in between checks will lead to delays in response time to IO devices.
- **Handshaking**
  - This algorithm once it recieves a READY flag will initiate data transfer and send a DATA_VALID flag once done to indicate to the external device that the request is complete sucessfully and there is a handshake.
- **Interrupt driven IO**
  - IO requests take the form of an interrupt that cause a JUMP in the sequantial program executed by the CPU. Interrupts could be IRQs or NMIs. Te difference is that IRQs could be masked or supressed in a program sequence while NMI's must be handled and JUMPs current instruction sequence until the interrupt service routine is completed.
  - Interrupt service routines work through **context switching**. This is where once an interrupt is signalled the current instruction being executed is completed and the current context of the PC is pushed onto the stack and the program that executes a set service routine for interrupts is initiated by pushing the required address location  into the PC. Then the IO device request is handled. When done, the PC pushed into the stack initially is popped and the program running before the IO interrupt is resumed.
  - Nested interrupts nest contexts and pause interrupt service routines//IO requests currently being executed to handle the new requests unless the Io request being executed was non maskable.
  - Advantages: Fast response to IO requests; no wasted CPU time since there is no manual checking and all IO requests are done on their own by interrupting the CPU directly.
  - Disadvantages: All data transfers are done by the CPU; complex hardware and software.
- **Direct Memory Access DMA**
  - Since CPU is the bottleneck for IO data ransfers we introduce a specific device called the DMAC which requires the CPU to initiate the transfer and the rest is left to the DMAC. The conorl of the three system buses will be surrendered to the DMAC by the CPU depending on the mode of data transfer of the DMAC.
  - The operation process:
      - DMA transfer request by IO device.
      - The DMA will notify the CPU of this request.
      - CPU will initialize the DMAC and enable its usage of the system buses after DMAC requests it.
      - CPU respons with an acknowledgement when it is reay to surrender buses.
    - The DMAC interrupts the CPU when data transfer is complete.
    - DMA modes: cycle stealing (“grabbing” available memory access cycles not used by the CPU), burst mode (locking out the CPU from the system buses for a fixed time until transfer is complete.)

**DMA organization:**
- Singlebus, detached DMA - all modules share the same bus; programmed io to exchange data; easy to implement but can be inefficient.
- IO bus - reduces number of IO interfaces in the DMA module to 1. the system bus shared with processor and memory used only for data transfer.

**WHAT TO USE WHEN**
- Memory-mapped input and output devices can be accessed in the same way as
RAM, at special address locations
- Polled I/O is a technique for scheduling input and output, where the CPU repeatedly checks if this is necessary.
I/O devices are usually much slower than the CPU, so handshaking techniques must be used to coordinate CPU and device to synchronise the transfer of data.
- Interrupts are a way to avoid polled I/O by diverting the CPU to a special I/O routine.
– quickly and only when necessary.
- The CPU is a bottleneck for I/O. DMA is used where large amounts of data must be transferred at high speed. If necessary, a DMA controller can be used instead of the CPU to transfer I/O data into/from memory - this can be faster than the CPU but at additional hardware cost.

**Direct comparisons**
|INTERRUPTS|POLLED IO|
|---|---|
|Interrupts allow devices to notify the CPU when they have data to transfer or when an operation is complete, allowing the CPU to perform other duties when no I/O transfers need its immediate attention.|Polling can be very fast and efficient, if both the device and the controller are fast and if there is significant data to transfer. It becomes inefficient, however, if the host must wait a long time in the busy loop waiting for the device, or if frequent checks need to be made for data that is infrequently there.|
|Fast response.|Delayed response when tasks are interleaved between checks.|
|No manual checking/time or power wasted.|Manual checking wastes power and time.|
|Comples software and hardware.|Simple software (looping construct with checks), simple hardware (notion of ready)|


|MMIO|DMA|
|---|---|
|Simple implementation.|Extra hardware integration, more expensive.|
|Use of general purpose mempry instructions and addressing modes.|Avoids CPU bottleneck, speeds up data transfer to memory.|
|Memory address space reserved for IO devices.|Uses system buses, depending on mode of operation can lock CPU out of system buses.|

---

# Microprocessor Architecture


> Computer architecture concerns the structure and properties of a computer system, as viewed from perspective of a software engineer.

> Computer organisation concerns the structure and properties of a computer system, as viewed form the perspective of a hardware engineer.

**Micro vs macro instructions**

- Microperations refer to the hardware level instructions like control signals.
  - Micro instructions are the individual signals that the control unit has to assert to a microprocessor to change the state of values in the processor. When several micro instructions are executed in the right sequence, the microprocessor computes an overall result.
- Macroperations are higher level instructions, sometimes also called assembly instructions, that are interpreted as microprograms with multiple steps. This means a single macroperation is composed of microprograms with multiple microperation steps.

**The Control Unit**

> Taking several inputs, such as the opcode of the IR, CCR values, clock pulses, the control unit generates control signals to control all CPU components and direct execution.

The job of the CU is to assert control signals. E.g. the fetch execute cycle:
- The CU must generate the fetch control signal sequence.
- Observes opcode of instruction fetched and select the correct control signal sequence according to that instruction.
- Generate a sequence of control signals to execute instruction specified by opcode.

---

**Control Unit Design**

- Hardwired (RISC): The CU is a combinatorial circuit where through the use of a sequencer and logical combinational circuits for each operation/instruction we sequence the output of these circuits inorder and assert them about the CPU. 
  - Advantages: Fast and high speed assertion.
  - Disadvantages: Complex hardware that is difficult to design and implement ; Inflexible design that is not scalable and unfriendly to the introduction of new instructions to the instruction set of the computer.
- Microprogrammed (CISC): Each machine instruction is turned into a sequence of primitive microinstructions, which form a microprogram, stored in a ROM called microprogram memory.
  - Advantages: Easier to design and implement; Flexible design facilitates inheritance of processor architecture design and can change the instruction set without worrying about the control unit.
  - Disadvantages: Slower than hardwired CU due to the fetch and sequence process.

| Microprogrammed | Hardwired |
|---|---|
|Generate control signals with microinstructions stored in micromemory.| Generate control signals with hardwired logic circuits. |
|Slower, fetching from micromemory to sequence miccroprogram. | Faster. |
|Scalale design, can modift instruction set.|Infelxible design, cannot easily modify instruction set.|
|Cheaper, easier to implement and design.|Expensive, harder to implement.|
|Handles complex instructions.|Cannot do that.|
|CISC|RISC|

> CISC architectures primarily use the micro-programmed approach for control
unit design, while RISC architectures use a hard-wired approach.
A very well known example of RISC is of computer chips made from the company ARM (Advanced RISC Machine).
While Intel uses a hybrid approach, commonly used instructions are hardwired while others are micro-programmed, their chips are a good example of ones that use the CISC architecture.

















