---
layout: default
title: CS140
math: true
---

## Concepts and Terminologies

The two main features of computer security are that:
1. **There is no such thing as absolute computer security.**

Some questions to ask when we try to build some sort of secutiry in a system to reduce risk:
- security in what aspects
- security from whom.
- security to what level (cost vs performance)

2. **Theory is not the same as practice.**
Security is not about theory but also abnout implementation, deployment, maintainance, and temptation of assets at stake.


---

**The CIA triangle** is a security model that defines three key principles to be present in any secure system. The breachment of any of these principles is a serious consequence.

- Confidentiality - no unauthorized disclosure
- Integrity - no unauthorized change.
- Availability - users are not denied access to resources. no unwarranted delay.


---
**Basic Security Terminologies:**

- **Asset** - anything of relative value, to be protected.
  - Customer database, source code, laptop, staff, consultants, reputation.
- **Vulnerability** - A flaw in a system's design/implementation that could be exploited to violate the security policy.
  - Weak passwords, bugs, employee unaware of security policy.
- **Threat** - a potential for violation of security, where an attacker posseses capability and intention to breach security.
  - Threat = capability * intent
  - Threat evaluation models = STRIDE by Microsoft considers various security aspects (CIA triangle, authentication, authorization, non-repudiation).
- **Risk** - an expectation of loss expressed as the probability of an attack causing a harmful result. where the probability of an attack refers to some threat exploiting a potential vulnerability.
  - risk = attack risk * harm
  - attack risk = threat * vulnerability
- **Attack** - an assault on security that derives from a threat.
  - Active attack: DDOS, Passive attack: listening to network traffic, other attakc forms are discussed below.
- **Countermeasure** - An action that reduces a threat, vulnerability, harm, or by eliminating or preventing the attack or by detecting the attack and reacting with corrective action. Anything that will reduce the violation of the security.
  - Firewalls, passwords, encryption, intrusion detection systems, login systems that lock after 3 failed attempts at authorization.
- **Trust** - Trust is used in many contexts, trusted user, trusted third party, trusted host, trusted systems.
  - Security policy for trusted users will be different than other users
  - Trust relationship limits our responsibility
    - When we design security mechanism/policy, we will think threat will not come from these trusted entities - so we do not need to think about how to defend against them
  - Affects our view of threat and thus the countermeasures we employ
  - Trust is also a valuable business asset - it is something that a business would want to protect and maintain.

--- 

**Attack forms:**

- Malware- worms/virus
- Denial of service - sending massive numbers of requests to certain sites/accounts hence cannot serve requests from genuine users.
- Hacktivism - protest against institutions.
- Social Engineering - exploiting trust socially, getting personal information.


**Worms vs Virus**
Both self-replicate and likely to achieve rapid population growth

- Virus - replicate into other executable code and infect it.
- Worm - standalone, doesn’t need a host program.
- Sometimes they are used interchangeably.

---
**Risk Analysis** 

- Informal risk analysis:
  - Identify (value) assets.
  - Identify vulnerabilities
  - Identify threats

- Qualitative analysis by organization - DREAD microsoft.
  - Damage - how bad would an attack be?
  - Reproducibility - how easy is it to reproduce the attack?
  - Exploitability - how easy is it to launch the attack?
  - Affected users - how many people will be impacted?
  - Discoverability - how easy is it to discover the threat?

- Quantitative analysis - Fault tree analysis.
  - You basically list the possible events that can occur , and list the possible causes of it – until the most basic cause. Also known as root cause analysis.
  This can only tell us the probability an attack will occur. Afterwards, we still have to determine the amount of harm that it will cause, and we will get some form of      measurable risk.


---

## Authentication

Computer security is about the prevention/detection of unauthorized actions by users of a computer system. (ACCESS CONTROL).

To do this we must authorize users.

Hence the first step to security control is to identify users and verify them.
1. Identification - realize identity by username.
2. Authentication - Verify the user such that they are in fact who they claim they are.

---
**Setting passwords for users**

The most common authentication method is the setting of a password associated with each user in a system.
- invaluable first line of security defence
- easy to use and implement

However this method itself has many vulnerabilities rooted from many reasons such as:
- password tendencies, setting the same password and id accross many systems (user overload).
- phishing/spoofing
- implementation issues: storing in plaintext, unlimited login attempts.


Possible solutions for users:
- password safe software
- password hints and usage of different ones accross accounts
- dual factor authentication
- other forms like biometrics etc..

---

**Password Guessing and Attacks**

- The time taken to crack a password with brute force depends on the number of combinations,
Let length = $L$, and character set size = $W$:
$Total\ Combinations\ = W^L$

- Expected time to crack a password: $Time\ = (Total\ Combinations)/Speed$

- **Password strength**: will depend on password length and the size of the character set used. This way, longer passwords with a range of characters are "stronger"/more difficult to brute force than the latter.
  - This is expressed as an `entropy value` where more "disorder" is essentially a stronger, harder to guess password.
Therefore, $entropy\ = L\cdot log_2(W)$
  - It is likely that human generated passwords often have less uncertainty and are weaker/more guessable. The more random something is the more uncertain/hard to guess it is. Randomly generated passwords by algorithms are better choices.


Types of attacks:
- online - successive login attempts
- offline - obtain the shadow file from a system and crack passwords of the hashes within this file.

- Brute force: This is enumerating every possible solution/combination of characters to make guesses until the correct combination is found. This is `characters used ^ length of password` combinations to check. Speed of processor etc will also play a part.

---

**Storing Passwords - Password Hashing using one way functions**

Passwords must be stored as hashes generated by a hash function of choice. Hashes are one-way functions, producing fixed representations of passwords/inputs.

- Hash is generated by a one-way hash function
- Hash function produces a fixed length hash value from the input.
- Hashes are not meant to be reversible. Easy to compute f(x) but very hard to compute x from f(x).
  - If the input changes by even a bit - the resulting hash should be completely different.
  - Hash function types: MD5, SHA256, SHA512 etc…

**Other Authentication Methods**
- Biometrics - Involves authentication through unique physical characteristics of individuals.
- ie. fingerprints, facial features, retina, etc...
- The main drawbacks are that it does not have a clear cut yes or no - there is room for false negatives or even false positives (which are worse). This makes it unstable and not a robust/reliable form of authentication.

---

## Cracking passwords

- Brute force is usually the simple and inefficient approach.
- Dictionary attack - trying likely words and common passwords from a dictionary.
- Lookup tables - improvemet of dictionary attacks; lookup of pre-computed hash values for a large sum of passwords.
- Reverse lookup tables - improvement of lookup tables (less memory usage); usage of hash chains to reduce storage.
- Rainbow tables -  an improvement (time) on reverse look-up tables as it reduces chain collisions in hash chains.

### Brute Force and Dictionary Attacks

Basic Algorithm:
```
1. guess a password (brute or dictionary elem)
2. hash the guess.
3. check if hash equals given hash.
4. if equal the password is found; otherwise, repeat 1.
```

- Brute Force Attacks
  - try every possible combination of characters
  - very computationally expensive, the least efficient
  - will eventually find the password after a long time (longer if passwords are more complex and longer)
- Dictionary Attacks
- Uses a file containing words, phrases, common passwords, and other string that are likely to be used as a password
  - These dictionary files are constructed by extracting words from large bodies of text, and even from real databases of passwords.
  - Further processing is often applied to dictionary files, such as replacing words with their “leet speak: equivalents (hello = h3110)

With brute forcing the password is eventually found, at a huge cost often. Dictionary attacks are likely to find but not certain.


### Lookup tables

Brute/dictionary attacks requires the guessing and then hashing of each guess. Removing the hashing step from this iterative algorithm will speed things up. This is a lookup table attack where hashes mapped to the passwords are stored in a precomputed table and the attack comprises of a simple lookup for the given hash to find a match in the table.

> Basically dictionary but precomputes hashes. More efficient during attack, timewise.

### Reverse Lookup tables:

There are still problems with dictionary and lookup tables such as storage/memory because:
- A large number of passwords must be stored and this gets especially bad for long passwords.

> Reverse lookup tables are a time-memory tradeoff where even long passwords can be cracked relatively more efficiently.

We make use of **hash chains** and **reduction functions** that map hashes back to values (not inverses of hash functions).
Essentially, the reduction function maps hashes back to values in the password domain.

The password must belong to a domain in P where it is the set of all combinations of length L characters in a character set W. Example, if we want to crack all passwords of length 5, consisting of the characters from the character set [ABC…XYZ0123456789], then P is the set of all combinations of 5 characters from this character set.
The only requirement for reduction function is to return a value in P, other than that it can be anything.

E.g.

```
Hash: "random"                           -> "7ddf32e17a6ac5ce04a8ecbf782ca509"
R:    "7ddf32e17a6ac5ce04a8ecbf782ca509" -> "ienw3"
Hash: "ienw3"                            -> "b9322e367ad002d5adf7ca60b8b61e86"
      ... (1000 times) ...
Hash: "o1gti"                            -> "27aa4cbd3653a4617e0aec76ba3af9a4"
```

**So how is space saved?** 

Although many intermediate hashes and passwords are created in a hash chain we only store the start and end passwords because we already have the reduction function and hash function in hand.

E.g. say we got hold of the hash of the password for some user in a system. We can apply the reduction function and check if this password exists in the reverse lookup table (storing starting password and ending hash); if found, the search ends otherwise we start an iterative process:

```
1. Apply the R function on the hash.
2. Check if the resultant password exists in the table.
3. If not, hash it and repeat from step 1 until a set limit N (i.e 1000) or until we find a match.
```
$h (R) \rightarrow p1' (H) \rightarrow h1' (R) \rightarrow p2' (H) \rightarrow ...$

E.g. We store only h and p2' in the reverse lookup table for each such hash chain.

When a matching password is found in the reverse lookup table:
- We can get the corresponding start password (from the look-up table) and use it to recreate the chain.
- There is a good chance that the chain will contain the given hash h.
- If so, the password immediately preceding h in the chain is the matching password

**Problem: Hash Chain collisions**

The reduction function we have defined does not represent a 1 to 1 relation between the hash and the password – 2 different hashes when going through the (R) may give the same output. This is a false alarm.

E.g.
```
Chain 1: p1-> h1 -> p2 -> h2 -> p3 -> h3 -> p4
Chain 2: p’1 -> h’1 -> p’2 -> h’2 -> p2 -> h2 -> p3*
```

Chain collision wastes space for the attacker:
- this is because after a certain $p_n$ all following passwords in both chains will be the same
- if this chain was in the 10,000, a majority will be the same (wastes space!)

### Rainbow Tables

> Rainbow tables are designed to reduce chain collisions or false alarms. It does this by using different R (reduction) functions in different reduction stages when generating the hash chain to reduce the probability of chain collisions.

**Algorithm**

```
1. Given a hash, $h$, the reduction functions must be applied in the right order when creating the chain.
2. Lets say we have $k$ reduction functions, anyone of them can be applied first to the given hash.
3. Assume $R_k$ is first applied to the given hash:
  3.1) $h (R_k) \rightarrow p1' (H) \rightarrow h1' (R_1) \rightarrow p2' (H) \rightarrow ... \rightarrow hx'(R_{k-1})$
4. If password not found, means $R_k$ was not the first R function to be applied. Proceed to assume $R_{k−1}$ is first applied.
  4.1) $h (R_{k-1}) \rightarrow p1' (H) \rightarrow h1' (R_k) \rightarrow p2' (H) \rightarrow ... \rightarrow hx'(R_{k-2})$
5. If password not found, continue so on and so forth, until finally $R_1 $is first applied:
  5.1) $h (R_1) \rightarrow p1' (H) \rightarrow h1' (R_2) \rightarrow p2' (H) \rightarrow ... \rightarrow hx'(R_{k})$
6. If the password still cannot be found after this, we say that the password of the given hash is not embedded in the rainbow table, and we are not able to find it.
```

---

## Defences

- There is no way to prevent brute-force or dictionary attacks.
- But we can use password salts to make lookup table, reverse lookup and rainbow tables attacks less effective.

**Password Salt**
- Salt is a randomly generated number.
- $h\ = Hash(Password\ + Salt)$
- Both h​ and the corresponding salt are stored in the password file/shadow.

**Salt Storage/Authentication Process: Algorithm**
When a user enters a password during the login
1. Obtain the salt value used to generate the hash for the user
2. Connect the input password with the salt​ // append
3. Generate the hash of this input and compare it with the stored hash.

**The problem attackers face when salt is involved**
> In order for the lookup table attack to succeed, an attacker needs to precompute the tables.

- Since salt is used, we precompute and store the hash of a password for each possible salt value, which increases the possible combination of passwords + salts that we have to pre-compute in our lookup tables a lot.
Briefly, a single password will have many hash values stored due to different salt and password combinations.

- When the salt is large (e.g. 48bits), the required storage space will be too big for the attack to be worthwhile. In order to precompute reverse and rainbow tables, an attacker needs to generate a chain for a password and each possible salt.

Because salt is not user generated - makes it more unpredictable as well.


---
## Passwords in Linux

TLDR. When a user is created their info is stored in the `/etc/passwd` file and their hash + salt is stored in the `etc/shadow` file. Only the user can read `passwd` and only root can read `shadow`.

...

**Protection Measures in UNIX**
Unix system may set the local rules for setting passwords. For example, it can set the length that password must have, number of upper or lower cases, or even symbols.
- Time before password can be changed or must be changed.
- Salt used (pseudo-random).
- Type of Hash can be changed as well.

---

## Cryptography

Plaintext: the original message
Ciphertext: the result of encrypting the message
Encryption/decryption: the process of transforming plaintext to ciphertext (or reverse)

**Different types of encryption**
- Secret key/Symmetric Encryption:
  - The key is a secret, only known to the communicating parties.
  - The same key is used for encryption and decryption
  - DES, AES (standards)

```
1. A secret key is shared by sender and receiver.
2. This secret key is used together with a known pubic algorithm (like AES)
3. The ciphertext is transmitted
4. The receivers decrypt the ciphertext with the known algorithm and the secret key to get plaintext.
```

- Public key/Asymmetric encryption:
  - Use a key (reciever's public key) to encrypt the message
  - This encryption key can be publicly known
  - Reciever uses another key to decrypt the message - this key is mathematically related to the encryption key.
  - The decryption key is kept private.
  - The pairs of keys are related mathematically, but one cannot be derived from the other with ease.

**Encryption Techniques and Properties of Good Encryption Schemes**

> Confusion and Diffusion properties makes encryption algorithms more secure and robust when it comes to risk of cracking the key. 

1. Confusion:
If we change a bit/a letter of they key, multiple parts of the ciphertext will change hide the relationship between ciphertext and key. Increases ambiguity.

2. Diffusion
If we change a bit/a letter of the plaintext, then half of bits of the ciphertext should change, vice versa. This hides the relation between plaintext and ciphertext.

3. Cipher text is hard to break even with the most generous assumptions. It is important to know the encryption process - so there is no “security through obscurity”; know the initial settings (e.g. key length, block length) - as long as the key is secret the ciphertext is still secure.

4. Management of the encryption scheme must be feasible and cost-effective. Long keys may be very secure - but how can it be managed?


---
## Secret Key Encryption Methods
> Steganography is a means of hiding an encrypted message.

- why: Often when an encrypted message is sent, it is suspicious because it is unreadable.
- how: Steganography is used to hide the encrypted message in something unsuspicious. Essentially, hiding secret messages in plain sight.

- Hiding data in an image.
  - **LSB insertion** - E.g. using 24 bit colors we can hide 9 bits of data in 3 pixels of each 24 bits.
  - Data to be hidden is overriden with the LSB of the data it hides within. Therefore changes to e.g. color of an image is negilgible to the naked human eye.
- **Code Words/Code Book** - Define code for each vocabulary in a code book which is like a dictionary. You lookup the dictionary to decipher the code word.
- **Transposition/Permutation Cipher** - same data in different permutations, key is knowing what permutation was carried out. 
  - This can be writing some plaintext in columns and transposing the matrix of letters by reading it as rows.
  - Can be done multiple times:
    - **Double Transposition:** choose a code word of length the same as number of columns in the matrix of the plain text. Shuffle the codeword and the ciphertext is the transposition in order of codeword.
- **Monoalphabetic Substitution Cipher/Caesar Cipher**
  - Basically have a ciphertext alphabet, where each symbol maps to the normal alphabet.
  - Problem: Not the best technique because there is a linear relation between the letters/symbols and attackers can easily figure out the encryption key.
  - Can use a keyword in the ciphertext alphabet to eliminate the linear relation but this can also be cracked with **frequency analysis.**

**Frequency analysis** is the study of the distribution of letters in a text (ciper ususally) - this relies on the fact that some letters are used more than others. By counting the letter frequency of a certain symbol in the ciphertext, someone can make an intelligent guess on which letter in the alphabet it represents. When there is a linear relation between the plaintext and the cipertext alphabet the cipher can be cracked this way (the key can be found, which is the number of places shifted - in a monoalphabetic cipher).

To prevent this, multiple ciphertext alphabets are used…

- **Polyalphabetic Substitution Cipher/Vigenere Cipher**
  - A key is used to decide which ciphertext alphabet is applied in each substitution.
  - Still has the same statistical flaw for the letters that use the same key alphabet. This can be mitigated by using a longer keyword and is the most secure (in theory) if the key is the same length as the plaintext.
- **One time pad**
  - This is where each letter in the message is encrypted with a different alphabet set. This is as secure as you can get but the problem lies with how the key is shared as both parties have to know the key which is as long as the plaintext.
  - One time pad is not a practical solution because of key generation, key distribution, key protection.

**Combining Message and key, Unique substitution with XOR:**
In a computer, plaintext and the key are an arrangement of bits. The best way to combine them is to use bitwise XOR. AND and OR are not good as they do not produce unique encryption – so they are not good for decryption and XOR is less computationally expensive than addition.

---
## Encryption Standards

**Data Encryption Standard (DES)**
> The first standardised encryption method. Is based on the Feistal approach.

- Uses block cipher: 64-bit plaintext block size.
- Uses a 56-bit secret key (technically 64-bit, but the 8th bit of each 8-bits are parity bits which are dropped after the permutated choice 1)
- Goes through 16 rounds of encryption operations per block
- Uses substitution (confusion)
- Uses permutation (diffusion)
- Encryption operations are all public - but it is still hard to crack because the secret key is safe.

**DES process/Feistal approach**
1. The plaintext is split into two blocks and the key is generated from the given 64 bit key through shuffling in each round of encryption. The blocks go throught he following steps in each round: $L_{i+1} = R_i, \; R_{i+1} = L_i \oplus F(R_i,K_i)$, where $Feistal functionF$ is some non linear.
2. Each round includes confusion/substitution by applying the feistal function with the key and XORing with the other half of the block
3. Diffusion/permutations are introduced through swapping the blocks in each round.
4. Decryption involves pretty much the exact same steps 
Each round is: $L_{i+1} = R_i, \; L_{i} = R_{i}=1 \oplus F(L_{i+1},K_i)$

**Block Cipher**: Encrypts blocks of data one a time (DES)
**Stream Cipher**: Encrypts each input element (bit or byte etc.) one at a time, producing the machine output element as the process goes along.

> A characteristic of all Feistal ciphers is that the process for decryption follows the exact same steps as encryption – only thing is that the round keys need to be used in the reverse order.


**Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)**

The DES is now considered to be insecure due to the short key – it has been broken by brute-force methods.

The AES is chosen as the new standard. Compared to DES it has:
- a longer block size (128-bits)
- longer key (variable: 128, 192, or 256 bits)
- faster implementation (only uses 1 S-box, while DES uses 8 distinct ones)

Similar block cipher features but uses a substitution-permutation network (SPN) – mainly operations over matrices which is designed for more **inherent parallelism** and hence faster.

**AES is secure.** A computer that can break DES in 8 seconds will take 1.3 × 1015 years to break AES-128.
AES-256 can also provides post-quantum computing assurance.

# Public Key Encryption

**Properties of Modular Arithmetic**
1. (A+B) mod n = ((A mod n) + B) mod n
2. (A+B) mod n = ((A mod n) + (B mod n)) mod n
3. (A*B) mod n = ((A mod n) * B) mod n
4. (A*B) mod n = ((A mod n) * (B mod n)) mod n
5. $x^{A*B}$ mod n = $(x^A\ mod\ n)^B$ mod n
6. $(x^A\ mod\ n)^B$ mod n = $(x^B\ mod\ n)^A$ mod n

**The Primitive Root/One-way Function**

$k = y^x\ mod\ p$

where 
- $y$ is the primitive root
- the range of $k$ is from 1 to $p-1$ for successive values of $x$.
- we get a uniform distribution of $[1, p-1]$
- if we guess any value $x$, we get any value from the distribution to be $k$.

$k = y^x\ mod\ p$ is a one way function where $y$ is the primitive root mod p and $p$ is an enormous number (512 bits or more).
This means that for any given value of $k$, guessing what $x$ is and getting it right has a probability of $1/(p-1)$


**Public Key Encryption**

**The problem with secret key encryption is that it takes a lot of effort to transfer the key safely. There are a few ways such as Physical Transfer, Key Distribution Centre, Online transfer by breaking the key up to ensure security.**

Public key encryption uses a one way function like the one above to use pairs of keys during communication to keep one public and one private key; where the two keys are mathematically related but one cannot be derived from the other easily.

During communication:
- The sender will encrypt a message with the public key of the recipient.
- Then the recipient can decrpyt the message with their private key.


**RSA**
> RSA is a PKE scheme.

- Generaing the public key $n$:
  - Choose 2 large secret prime numbers $p$ and $q$. The public key is $n = p*q$
  - (**Find the derived number $e$**) Select a value $e$ that is relatively prime to (coprime) $p-1$, $q-1$ and $(p-1)(q-1)$ where $1 < e < (p-1)(q-1)$
    - This means that, there must be no common factor for $e$ and $(p − 1) \cdot (q − 1)$ except for 1. In other words two numbers $e$ and $(p – 1) \cdot (q – 1)$ are coprime. 

**Encryption**
$C = M^e\ mod\ n$ where C is the ciphertext, M is the message. 
It is infeasible to get M from C, because it's computationally difficult.

- Generating the private key:
  - We find a number $d$ where $d \cdot e = 1\ mod\ ((p-1)(q-1))$
  - This is the private key of party A and is the multicative inverse of $e\ mod\ (p-1)(q-1)$
    - In words, Number $d$ is the inverse of $e$ modulo $(p - 1)(q – 1)$. This means that $d$ is the number less than $(p - 1)(q - 1)$ such that when multiplied by $e$, it is equal to 1 modulo $(p - 1)(q - 1)$. 

**Decryption**
$M = C^d\ mod\ n$, given the private key $d$ we can easily computer $M$ from $C$.

- To find $d$, we need to find a multiple of $e$ which is 1 greater than a multiple of $(p-1)(q-1)$. By iteraing multiples of $(p-1)(q-1)$ and adding 1 each time, we look for a multiple of $e$ in order to obtain $d$ eventually.

**Why is RSA safe?**
To break RSA an attacker must:
- The attacker must get a hold of $d$ (private key); this requires them to reverse the one way function used; this is very computationally difficult.
- OR know $d$, which means they must know $p$ and $q$ and consequently know $n$. This means they will need to know the one way function again.
- Brute forcing is the only way out but with large key sizes this is way too expensive.

**SKE vs PKE**

> SKE is much faster than PKE as there is a single key and less expensive calculations involved.

| Secret  | Public |
|---|---|
| Uses XOR, substitution, permutation - **fast** | Uses a one-way function - **slower**   |
| Key is secret - requires shorter key for same level of security and faster.  | Relies on length of public key to prevent brute force attacks and slower.  |
| Key distribution is complicated. Need to be established beforehand communication.  | Key distribution is easy. No need to establish a common secret key. |



## Digital Signature & Certificates

**Integrity, Authentication & Non-repudiation**
The symmetry property of PKE enables us to prioritize either privacy OR integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation.

**Symmetry of Public Key Encryption.** We can encrypt and decrypt starting with the public key then the private key, or the other way around! This works according to the property 6 of modular arithmetic stated above.

- If we encrypt with A's private key then we can use A's public key to decrypt. With this we value integrity authentication, and non-repudiation over privacy BUT not privacy (since anyone can get a hold of A's public key).

- Otherwise, if we encrypt with A's public key then we can decrypt with A's private key. This ensures privacy over integrity, authentication, and non-repudiation.

Overall, we encrypt with private keys for anyone and everyone to be able to decrypt because it provides:
- Integrity. We don’t care about the privacy of the message, but we want to be sure that no one tampers with it
- Authentication. I want my receiver to know that the message definitely came from me.
- Non-repudiation. If someone sends a malicious message, the system will be able to identify who the owner of the public key is. The system is traceable such that no one can deny their actions - in the context of communication - the sender cannot deny they sent something if the encryption scheme provides non-repudiation.

**How is Integrity and non-repudiation ensured this way?**
**To provide integrity, we send an encrypted message along with a plaintext message** (remember we don’t care if people see the message, we just don’t want them to tamper with it.) The fact that the encrypted message is encrypted by the private key of the sender also provides non-repudiation and authentication.

- For integrity, when the reciever decrypts the message with the public key of the sender they will compare the two messages to be the same; to guarantee integrity.
**If someone else decrypts with the senders public key and tampers with it, they won't be able to get the sender's private key to encrpyt again.** This way the reciever knows the message was tampered as there is no encrypted message. They also have a low probability of being able to reverse the one-way function to re-encrypt the tampered message such that the tampered plaintext and tampered ciphertext is the same.

- For non-repudiation  - we know that no one else but the sender has access to their private key and since the sent message can only be decrypted with the sender's public key - it is proven that the sender really was the sender (non-repudiation because the sender cannot deny being the sender).

**Digital Signatures (DS)**

**One problem however, encrypting an entire message may be costly (time-wise), for the purpose of integrity we don’t actually need to encrypt the entire message.**

Digital Signatures contain a message digest instead; this is the hash of the message which is then encrypted with the sender's private key once again.

**Digital signatures are attached to plain text message, and are used to verify integrity.** The final message is: $e + [hash(e)]_{ku}$ where $e$ stands for email/message contents.

Then the reciever has to:
1. Use the sender’s public key to decrypt the digital signature (non-repudiation) to recover the hash.
2. Generate a hash of the received plaintext using the same hash algorithm used by the sender.
3. Compare the two hashes (integrity).


**Encryption vs DS**
| Encryption | DS |
|---|---|
| Maintains confidentiality | Provides integrity check, authentication, and non-repudiation. |
| Can recover plaintext | Cannot recover plaintext |

---

**We don't yet have authentication as also an attacker could replay earlier messages authenticated with the same key, so a protocol should take measures against this (e.g. by including message numbers or timestamps).** (Also, in case of a two-sided conversation, make sure that either both sides have different keys, or by another way make sure that messages from one side can't sent back by an attacker to this side.)

**Message Authentication Code (MAC)**
Another way of providing integrity – the hash of an input file is computed and encrypted using a shared secret key. **This can guarantee integrity but cannot provide non-repudiation.** (We cannot trace back to a single individual as the key is shared by more than one party.)
- Because MAC is created with the secret key.
- Secret key is shared by more than one party.

MAC is used because it is much faster than DS as it uses secret key encryption instead of public.

|MAC|DS|
|---|---|
|We save space as we only encrpyt the hash.|Still, we save space again, We save space as we only encrpyt the hash.|
|Secret key/asymmetric encryption of a hash (shared secret key).|Symmetric public/private key encryption of hash - Use private key to encrypt the hash.|
|Only provides integrity of message. Shared secret keys cannot be traced to a single person.|Provides integrity and non-repudiation since private keys can onyl be traced back to the sender.|
|MAC is much faster than Digital Signature as it uses secret key encryption (dhift/XOR operations are quicker)|Slower as it uses PKE (slower computationally difficult operations such as modular exponentiation)|

**Digital Certificates**

> Digital certificates are provided by a trusted 3rd party called the Certificate Authority (CA). These certify that a public key indeed belongs to somebody. (Authentication)

E.g. X.509 cert format is used to compose certificates which includes:
```
Subject: distinguished name of the user
Subject’s public key
Certificate Authority’s subject
Digital signature of CA
```

- Distinguished name format: `(O: organisation, OU: Organisation Unit, CN: Common Name)`

---
**Process of authentication through certificates**

- **One way authentication**
A root certificate is issued by the CA to itself. When a user A wants to verify B's certificate:
1. A requests B's certificate and B sends it.
2. A uses CA's root certificate to verify the integrity of B's public key; since B is signed by CA with their private key.
3. 3. If B is genuine then B's public key in the certificate is also genuine. 

This way A can authenticate B only.

- **Strong Authentication**
Since CA issues certificates to both A and B; then A can send a message to B with strong authentication:
1. A sends a signed message and its digital certificate to B
2. A's digital certificate proves its public key's authenticity.
3. B uses A's public key to then decrypt the message and this proves that A really signed the message with its private key.
3. This is strong/two-factor authentication that proves A is really A and the message also came from A.

- **Authentication Chain and Sub-CAs**

In addition to issuing certs to users, CA can also set up a sub-CA e.g. CA sets up CA1
- CA1 can also issue certs to users
- The certs issued by CA1 are signed by CA1
- CA1 also issues a root cert to itself

Consider a chain of authentication certificates where we have CA and CA1 where CA1 issues a certificate to A. If A wants to send something to B and B wants to authenticate A:
1. B will use CA's public key to verify CA1's certificate.
2. B then uses CA1's certificate to verify A's certificate.
3. Then B uses A's authentic public key to verify the integrity of its sent signed message.

**Web of Trust**
This is a solution where there is no concrete CA or some centralised authority. Each user establishes their personal trust network.
- Each user creates their own certificate and can sign other user's certificates based on their personal trust in them.

**Attributes of Web of Trust**
1. Validity - indicates the confidence that others have that a user's public key is actually authentic to them.
2. Trust - indicates the confidence others in the network have that a certain user is careful when signing other's certificates.

**The rating scale is **unknown**, **marginal**, **full**, or **ultimate**.**

- If user A is certain that B’s public key belongs to B,
  - A signs B’s certificate and set “validity” to be “full”.
  - Otherwise, “validity” is set to be “unknown” or “marginal”.

- If user A is fully (or marginally) confident that user B will be very careful when B signs other users’ certificates, A sets “trust” of B to be “full” (or marginal)
  - Otherwise, “trust” of B is set to be “unknown”.

**Determining validity**
Validity of two users A and C will be determined under the consideration of 4 parameters:
1. Treshold distance
2. Validity and trust score
3. Number of users trusted
4. Number of valid users

User C’s key is considered valid by user A if the key has been signed:
- by at least one user, B, with “full” trust set by A
- by at least n users, $B_1, B_2, ..., B_n$, with “marginal” trust set by A, where n is predefined in the web of trust scheme.

In other words if someone that A trusts fully has signed C then A will trust C. If n people that A trusts marginally have trusted C then by majority voting A trusts C too.

In terms of treshold distance, if all users from A, $B_1, B_2, ..., B_n$ to C are of full trust; C's key may not be considered valid unless the distance between C and A doesn't meet a set treshold (i.e. 4 people in between).

> An exception to treshold distance and the other parameters is a trust level of **ultimate** throughout.


|Certificate Authority|Web of Trust|
|---|---|
|Signatures provided by a trusted 3rd party called the Certificate Authority (CA)|There is no concrete CA or some centralised authority. Each user establishes their personal trust network.|
|Certificate Authority issues the certificates.|Users create their own certificates and can sign other user's certificates based on their personal trust in them.|
|Certify that a public key indeed belongs to somebody, if signed by trusted authority.|Notions of trust and validity and a stream of relative trust all set by user of WOT model. Relability may be quiestionable, we refer to properties of WOT which are usually preset fy someone "trustable" like an admin.|
|By default, web browsers and email clients are installed with root certificates of popular CAs.|In a Web of Trust model, each user is responsible for cultivating and maintaining his own outgoing signature chains.|
|Digital certificate format weakness: All CAs have the authority to sign any certificate they choose – therefore if one CA certificate is compromised the attacker can impersonate any site on the internet. Thus every certificate verification has multiple single points of failure.|Trusting a single faulty person is less likely to lead to such single point failures due to the notion of treshold distance, unless that questionable person was foolishly set as ultimate trust which is essentially all up to the sender.|
|Authentication process through certificates differs.|Attributes such as "validity" and "trust" and certain properties used to determine them and derive trust.|

An Authority is thus more easily attacked than a well-maintained Web of Trust, but less easily attacked than a badly-maintained one, and more convenient for the end user.

## Security & Authentication Protocols

> A security protocol is a fixed pattern of exchanges (steps) between 2 or more communication parties to achieve a security related task.

**Diffie-Hellman-Merkel Key Exchange Protocol (DHM)**

**We use the DHM protocol when two parties wish to communicate privately, but the communication channel is not secure (everything can be read by outsiders), and they want to use secret key encryption.** How do we establish the secret key?

Therefore we get a safe AND fast alternative to symmetric encryption.
The main purpose of the Diffie-Hellman key exchange is to securely develop shared secrets that can be used to derive keys. These keys can then be used with symmetric-key algorithms to transmit information in a protected manner.

The critical part of the Diffie-Hellman key exchange is that both parties end up with the same result, without ever needing to send the entirety of the common secret across the communication channel.
The only shared values are the common $p$ and $y$ and the output of the one way function for both. Given these it's totally infeasible to access both the secret keys of the two as well as the common secret.

**Algorithm**

1. A and B mutually decide on two numbers $p$ and $y$ where y is the primitive root (consecutive powers of y in range $1\ to\ (p-1)$) of p; and p is a large prime number. Both these values are publicly known.
2. Then A and B inidivudally choose their own secret numbers $a$ and $b$.
3. They then "mix" their numbers with the one way function (usually modular exponentiation $A_k = y^a\ mod\ p$ and $B_k = y^b\ mod\ p$).
4. Then A and B exhange these values $A_k$ and $B_k$ with each other.
5. Then A will calculate the shared secret using the recieved value from B, $B_k$, and its own secret key $a$ (The calculation done is $(B_k)^a\ mod\ p$). Then, B does the same thing. The shared secret for both will end up the same value and the secret keys of A and B are never exposed in the process.


**Authentication Protocols**

Normally when working in a local environment (secure channel) with a fixed link to the host, we use passwords to authenticate a user. However, more must be done over insecure channels. **We use encrypted passwords, digital signature, or public key encryption for authentication.**

- Public keys can be used to ensure integrity and non-repudiation, provided that the public key is trusted. Why can’t it provide authentication as well?

**Replay Attack**

There is a risk of the **replay attack** in which once A and B are communicating and B accepts and authorizes A as A through its public key there can be a third party E that replays the message and B will accept E's message as A's. In other words, an attacker could replay earlier messages authenticated with the same key.

There are two solutions to ensure safe authentication through public keys:

1. **Timestamping:** When A sends a message to B the encrypted message is appended a timestamp. If E replays the encrypted message B will know it was an old message.

2. **Sessions tokens//Tokenization:** B can generate a token R (which is a random number/aka a nonce :o) which must be signed by A to authenticate the communication. A must encrypt the token with its private key and send it back to establish trust. This means whenever an alleged A wants to communicate with B it must wait for B to send a token and then send back the encrypted token with the message.

Both these methods are unilateral authentication where is A wants to send a message to B, B will try to authenticate A. But A never doubts B's identity and assumes it is the correct person.

**Mutual Authentication**

In this method, when A wants to communicate with B, A will send a token to B for it to sign and the message. Then B sends back the signed token with a token for A to sign. When A recieves this A will have authorized B and will send the signed token back to B at which point B also authorizes A.

**Man in the Middle attack//Authentication Spoofing**
A could communicate with E, but E could be malicious and decide to pass on the message to B. Now B will pass the token to E and E passes it to A and then passes the encrypted token back to B from A. This exploits both A and B.

There are 2 main solutions:
1. **Include the identity of the intended recipient encrypted along with the token from the recipient.**
A –> B: A
B –> A: R
A –> B: [R, E]A 🔔❕❗

B will know it wasn't the intended recipient and there is a man in the middle.

2. **If we’re using encryption for authentication(Needham-Schroeder Authentication protocol), enclose the sender’s ID.**
A –> B: A
B –> A: {B, R}KPA
A –> B: R

This was B expects A to send back the token to B but this is only possible if A decrypts the message by B.

**Needham-Schroeder Secret key-based protocol**

```
The principle is to include both sender and receiver’s info in the protocol
When using encryption, sender’s id is included.
When using digital signature, receiver’s id is included
```

Disadvantages: Server needs to distribute secret key directly to B, and since B does not ask for a key, but receives one, if B is not responsive (AFK) or the server somehow can’t reach B then there will be no communication.

- Problem: If E manages to obtain an old session key, KAB, E can replay the old message relating to that session key.

If B completes the protocol and assumes that they shared a key with A, E would have tricked B.
Can prevent this easily with timestamps.


## Secure Email

**PGP Encryption**
> Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) is an encryption system used for both sending encrypted emails and encrypting sensitive files.

- Advantages: PGP uses both symmetric encryption and public-key encryption, it allows users who have never met to send encrypted messages to each other without exchanging private encryption keys.


**How does it work?**
At the highest level, this is how PGP encryption works:

1. First, PGP generates a random session key using one of two (main) algorithms. This key is a huge number that cannot be guessed, and is only used once.
2. Next, this session key is encrypted. This is done using the public key of the intended recipient of the message. The public key is tied to a particular person’s identity/private key, and anyone can use it to send them a message but only they can decrpyt it.
3. The sender sends their encrypted PGP session key to the recipient, and they are able to decrypt it using their private key. Using this session key, the recipient is now able to decrypt the actual message.

This way we get the bes tof both worlds both security and quick computation.

## Virtualization

> Virtualization technology allows multiple OSs to run on a single computer. Running an instance of an OS is called a virtual machine.

- Host machine - physicla machine the VM instances run on.
- Host OS - OS of the host machine.
- Guest OS - OS instance for VM.

An OS sits in between the physical hardware and the user, it is the lowest level of software in a machine and hides away details/difficulty of communication with hardware by abstraction usage of the computer and allowing applications and higher level interaction software to run on top of it.

**A hypervisor** is a crucial piece of software that makes virtualization possible. It abstracts guest machines and the operating system they run on, from the actual hardware.

There are two types of hypervisors mainly:
- type 1 - bare metal/native (i.e. xen hypervisor); is a layer of software we install directly on top of a physical server and its underlying hardware. This provides services that allow multiple computer operating systems to execute on the same computer hardware concurrently.
- type 2 - aka hosted hypervisors, runs inside of an operating system of a physical host machine. As opposed to type 1 hypervisors that run directly on the hardware, hosted hypervisors have one software layer underneath.


- In embedded architectures, the hypervisor sists between guestOSs and hardware. Each VM instance is managed by a type 1 hypervisor. 
- In non-embedded architectures the hypervisor runs as an application to host OS (ie QEMU). These are type 2 hypervisors and often use a technique called dynamic binary translation where instructions issued to the guest OS are translated to an instruction that can run on the host OS. Hence type2 hypervisors are often slower due to the translation process and no direct access to hardware.

**Abstraction of physical resources in VMs**
Physical resources are abstracted as files in a hypervisor. Files are transferred to real hardware/memory only when required. (ie. the `.cow` approach for QEMU VM instances...)

**Life cycles of VMs**
In a normal physical machine, you can be in 3 states: Off, Running, or Suspended (Sleep).

> In VMs, you have an additional state: Paused.

- VM is still resident in the host machine but not allocated CPU.
- When multiple VMs are resident, only 1 VM is allocated CPU at a time (running on the physical machine), other VMs will be paused.

### Positive Impacts of Virtualization on Security

> Four features that benefit VM security are Isolation, State recording/restoring, Transience, and low privilage.

- **Isolation**
    - The running environment is isolated.
    - In a traditional multi-user OS, all users in the computer can be affected by an attack. However, in virtualisation, each guest OS is encapsulated and hardware/physical resources are abstracted.
    - Therefore, Each VM accesses separate file systems and memory blocks.
    - Hence, ideally a VM compromised by attackers will not affect the host or other VMs on the host.
    - Guest OSes are abstracted and encapsulated hence provides virus removal and dtaa integrity.
- **State Recording**
  - The virtual disk for a VM is stored as a file on the hypervisor. This allows the hypervisor to record changes to the contents of the virtual disk.
  - It is easy for VMs to restore to previous states.
  - State restore provides a "virus removal mechanism" for infected VMs and helps ensure data integrity.
- **Transience**
  - Physical servers are often always on while VMs can be started very quickly and remotely
  - Typically VMs are turned on only when they are needed, and turned off when they are not used anymore
  - Limiting operating time of VMs and turning them off/pausing when unused mitigates security risks because we can only infect a machine (physical or virtual) that is on.
- **Low Privilage**
  - In a physical computer, OS is the software that has the highest privilege in the computer; therefore, the OS can only be monitored by itself in a physical machine.
    - This means that, if the OS is infected with virus and it cannot be trusted there is nothing else to rely on.
  - A VM has lower privilege than the hypervisor.
    - VMS can be monitored by either the hypervisor, or by an authorised dedicated VM (Domain0).
    - The latter is preferred method since it helps keep the hypervisor simple.
    - The hypervisor gives the dedicated VM the permission to view resources allocated to the monitored VM. Hence infected VMs don't affect the hypervisor/manager due to their lower privilages.


### Negative Impacts of Virtualization

> Issues to consider overlap with some of the positive properties of VMs where openings occur. The issues considered are Transience, State recording and restoring, Mobility, Easy creation, and Identity.

- **Transience**
  -  While VMs beinf off when unused is a positivw quirk, it is a double edged sword because:
  - When virus hits conventional networks of physical machines, administrators often do the following:
     - Identify which machines are infected
     - Clean up infected machines
     - Apply security patches to prevent re-infection 
  - (**INFECTED VMS DISAPPEAR**) In virtualised environments, infected VMs may appear briefly and disappear before they can be detected making it difficult to identify which VMs are infected.
  - When performing patch management, virus and vulnerability scanning, the machines must be on. Because VMs are transient and not always on – difficult to fix the vulnerability of infected VMs.
  - The infected VMs may appear online briefly, infect other VMs and disappear offline before they are noticed making it difficult to eradicate the infection in the system.
  - As a result, in virtualization environments, worm/virus
    infections tend to persist at a low level, flare up again and
    again when conditions are right.
- **State recording and restoring**
  - (**LIMITATION/HYPERVISOR CASE**) Although, State restore provides a virus removal mechanism for infected GUEST VMs and helps ensure data integrity by rolling back to the pre attack state; If the hypervisor is compromised then it doesn’t work, and attackers have unlimited freedom and access to the hardware.
  - (**NO VIRUS CHECKING**) Additionally, since it is easy to restore infected VMs many users do not have the urge to secure their VMs with virus protection
  - 60% of VMs in production are less secure than their physical counterparts, due to this factor
  - (**SECURITY PATCH ROLLBACK**) Another limitation and drawback is that, if VMs were to get a secutiry patch and we rollback to an arbitrary previous state later (without the patch) then the guest OS remains unpatched unless recognized and applied again.
    - Hence secutiry patching guest OSes becomes a difficult job since administrators will need ot record patch dates and times and evaluate where patches need to be applied after rollback. 
  - (**ROLLBACK VULNERABILITIES**) Briefly, rolling back to previous states may re-expose patched vulnerabilities, re-enable suspended accounts, reuse retired encryption keys/tokens.
  - (**SENSITIVE DATA LIFETIME IS LONG**) A fundamental principle for building secure systems is minimizing the amount of time that sensitive data remains in a system.
  - In virtualized system, all state changes are recorded,which undermines the principle.
  - Moreover, the state changes will be transferred to persistent storage, which again breaks the security principle of minimizing the lifetime of sensitive data.
- **Mobility**
  - VMS are not physical, everything about a VM is virtualised as files – makes theft of data easier.
  - In fact, attackers can access copies of VM that are located on the physical disk of the host machine. Because the Guest OS has no access to that disk, the VM will not show any records of intrusion.
  - Being offline does not guarantee safety. An attacker can access and modify VM files while the VM is offline. A physical machine must be running to be accessible. "Then, modifications to VM files cannot be traced and fixed."
- **Ease of Creation/Difficulty applying of Security Measures**
  - In a traditional network of physical machines, all machines have same configurations.
    - When there are security vulnerabilities, the same security measure can be applied to all machines
  - (**VM SPRAWL**) VMs can be created rapidly, each with a unique configuration (VM Sprawl)
    - Cannot apply a uniform security measure to all VMs
    - The rapid growth of VMs exceeds the administrators’ ability to secure each unique VM 
- **Lack of Identity/non-repudiation**
  - In a traditional environment, a machine can be identified by MAC address, Ethernet port number. It is used as a mechanism of non-repudiation – the system has the mechanism to check who did something.
  - In a virtualised system , there is only one physical MAC address and a Port number, but multiple VMs are running so we cannot use MAC or ethernet port number for non-repudiation anymore.  (One port number may be used by many VMs. )

### Further Security Isssues in Virtualization

- **Hypervisor Intrusion**
  - If the hypervisor is compromised, the attacker can access all the VMs + even the host OS.
  - If it is compromised, all VMs can be accessed
  - he host OS will be in danger as well, as the hypervisor converts instructions (dynamic binary translation) for the guest OS into instructions for the host OS. This means he instructions sent by hypervisor can no longer be trusted as it could be malicious.
- **Inter-VM Communications**
  - "Inter-VM"/“VM-to-VM” attacks means that attackers user one VM to access or control other VMs on the same hypervisor.
  - Attacks can be achieved by inter-VM communication. A malicious VM can potentially access other VMs because all VMs share resources (memory, network connections etc.) on the hypervisor.
    - One example is with the embedded architecture of virtualization.
    - Domain0 is connected to all guest domains and inter-VM communication happens through the hypervisor. An attack on the shared memory segment of the hypervisor can use 1 VM to attack another VM.
- **Denial Of Service**
  - An improperly configured hypervisor can allow a single VM to consume all resources, starving other running VMs.
    - However, the solution to this is simple. Hypervisors should prevent any VM from gaining 100% usage of any resources. 

