---
title: Functional Programming
layout: default
math: true
---

# [Functional Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming)

# Lambda calculus, Recursion, and Turing machines
- Lambda Calculus is a formal system in mathematical logic for expressing computation based on function abstraction and application using variable binding and substitution. It is a universal model of computation that can be used to simulate any Turing machine.

- A recursive function is a function that calls itself during its execution. The process may repeat several times, outputting the result and the end of each iteration.

- A Turing machine is a mathematical model of computation that defines an abstract machine, which manipulates symbols on a strip of tape according to a table of rules. Despite the model's simplicity, given any computer algorithm, a Turing machine capable of simulating that algorithm's logic can be constructed.


Any recursive algorithm can be a lambda calculus algorithm and both can be represented as Turing machines.


# Imperative vs Functional

| Imperative | Functional |
| ------ | --- | 
|Mutation of state|Reduction of expressions   |
|Express *how* you want to do something|Express *what* you want to do| 
|Executed in order|Executed in arbitrary order|
|Iteration with loops|Recursion|

---

# Definitions & Functions

**The Haskell Compiler**
> Haskell is a statically typed functional programming language. This means that types are known at compile-time instead of run-time.

- It first goes through a parser that converts ASCII source code into data in memory.
- Then the GHC checks types and infers missing ones.
- Types are then erased after the type checking phase, and the compiler will generate binaries for the CPU to be able to run the program. (Types are not available at runtime – this is type erasure)

There are two main compiler errors:
- Parse errors: Syntax errors.
- Type errors

**Definitions**
> Definitions are when expressions are assigned to named variables, so they can be referenced elsewhere without having to be defined again inline.
Definitions are simply written as:
```
name = expression
```
The identifier name is always starts with a lower-case character.

Haskell evaluates programs by “reducing” expressions to a “normal” (simplest) form in a lazy manner. This is when a complicated statement has the rules defined by the language and the rest of the program applied to it to reduce its complexity, as it is a declarative language, for example `2+2` would be reduced to `4` by applying the definition of the `+` function.

**Arithmetic Expressions/Operators**
```hs
...
hoursperweek = daysperweek * 24
4 + 8
15 - 16
23 * 24
True && False
"abcdef" !! 0 -- indexing 
"CS" ++ "141 -- concat
("Hello" ++ " " ++ "World") !! 5 -- concat a string ang get index 5??
```
All of these expressions are simply "reduced" by GHC.

**Basic Types and their Reduction**

> The type of an expression tells what sort of value an expression will evaluate to.

> Expressions, when evaluated, reduce to values. Every value has a type. Types are how we group a set of values together that share something in common. Sometimes that commonality is abstract; sometimes it’s a specific model of a particular concept or domain

- If an expression cannot be reduced to normal form then the compiler will refuse to compile the program due to a type error. E.g. `not 7`. 
- Types are given on top of function definitions with the syntax `expression :: type`. This is not necessary for compilation but is useful for documentation purposes.
- Expressions could have multiple possible types.
```hs
42 :: Int
42 :: Integer
42 :: Num a => a
```
- The idea is that if an expression can be typed then the compiler will infer the most general type. More general means "more polymorphic". E.g. `Num a => a` is more polymorphic and general than `Int`.
- A less general type can be validated as long as it is permissible. E.g. `(108 :: Int)`.

*Boolean expressions*
- Negation : `not True` is False. `not (not True)` is True.
- AND: `True && False`
- OR: `True || False`

*Argument Application*
- f(x) - `f x`
- f(x,y) - `f x y`
- f(g(x)) - `f (g x)`
- f(x)g(x) - `f x * g x`

---

**Anonymous functions**
> The `\` is used to resemble the Lambda character from Lambda calculus, and it denotes a function without a name, which is just a transformation on an argument. For example, a function to multiply a parameter by two can be written as:

```hs
double = \x -> x * 2
```

With **syntactic sugar** we can define the same function as so:

```hs
double x = x * 2
```
---
**EXAMPLE DEFINITION/FUNCTION**

Implement an Exclusive OR (XOR) without a built-in function.

Definition: `xor = \a -> \b -> (a || b) && not (a && b)`
Takes in two values a and b as seen above.

Reduction:
```hs
xor True False
==> (\a -> \b -> (a || b) && not (a && b)) True False
==> (True || False) && not (True && False) -- this happens in 2 steps
==> True && not False
==> True && True
==> True
```
---

# Currying

> The process of converting a function which takes multiple arguments into a sequence of functions, each of which take one argument.

- In Haskell, functions fundamentally take single inputs to produce a single output.
- We can make functions "take multiple arguments" through partial application.

i.e. When adding two values together

```hs
add :: Int -> Int -> Int
add x y = x + y

>> add 5 6 
>> (add 5) 6

where 
    (add 5) :: Int -> Int
    add 5 = \x -> x + 5
```

# Uncurrying

> Contrastingly, there is a function `uncurry` that converts a curried function and converts it into a function on pairs.

```hs
uncurry :: (a -> b -> c) -> (a,b) -> c
```

- Uncurried functions take arguments simultaneously
  - `uncurriedFunction :: (a,b) -> c`
- Curried functions take arguments one at a time
  - `curriedFunction :: a -> b -> c`

---

**Usage of curry and uncurry in Haskell**
You almost never use curry, because Haskellers like to define their functions in curried form.

Sometimes you will see uncurry used to map with a function that takes two arguments

```hs
map (uncurry (+)) [(0,1), (2,3)]
```
> [1, 5]

---

# Conditionals

- **If..Then..Else**
```hs
not' x = if True then False else True
```

- **Guards**
```hs
min x y | x < y	    = x
		    | otherwise	= y
```

- **Case statements**
```hs
not' = \x -> case x of
  True -> False
  False -> True
```

# Lists and Comprehensions
> In Haskell, the list data type is implemented as a linked list. This effects how they should be used efficiently, for example, indexing inefficient, but looking at the first item is very efficient.

Lists are homogenous, meaning all elements must have the same data type. As a result of this, the type of a list is the polymorphic type signature [] :: [a], since they can store any type, but each element must have the same type.

Lists are almost always written with their syntactic sugar, but they are in fact constructed by prepending elements to an empty list.
```hs
x = [1,2,3]
x = 3 : (2 : (1 : []))
```

The : or “cons” is used as an infix operator to prepend elements to the list, building it up from an empty list

- This relates to how list data type is implemented as a linked list, as it encodes the fact that items are added as the head of the linked list sequentially.
- The type of the “cons” operator is `(:) :: a -> [a] -> [a]`, as it takes an element to prepend, and a list containing the same type, and returns a list of that type.

- **Ranges** Ranges are a way of generating lists, rather than having to explicitly enumerate them. Haskell can handle ranges for many data types, and will infer patterns from them. ie. `[1..5]`.
    - Since Haskell is lazily evaluated, it can store ranges of infinite length, and the data will only be used as it is needed.

**List Comprehensions**
The general syntax for list comprehension is:
```hs
[expression | generators-and-predicates]
```

- Variables introduced in the RHS of the list comprehension are in scope in the expression on the LHS. Additionally, variables from generators are in scope in later ones.

**Nested "Loops"**

```hs
[n*m | n <- [0..2], m <- [0..n]] 
=> [0*0,1*0,1*1,2*0,2*1,2*2] 
=  [0,0,1,0,2,4]
```

---
# Type Classes
 
> Type class constraints are used to restrict type variables to only types which support the functions or operators specified by the type class.
> 
Briefly, type classes constrain parametric polymorphism.

Take for e.g. a function `showAndAppend` that takes some type `a` and returns it as a `String` type.

We cannot:
```hs
showAndAppend :: a -> String
showAndAppend x = show x
```
We don't know anything about `a` and if it is not an instance of `Show` then it cannot be shown. So we contrain the arbitrary variable a as so:

```hs
showAndAppend :: Show a => a -> String
showAndAppend x = show x
```

Now only instances of `Show` can be shown and there will be no exceptions or type errors.

---
**Type Class Definitions**
> In a type class definition, we define the method typings that an arbitrary type a must implement to be an instance of that type class.

Type classes define the method typings that some type `a` must implement to be an instance of that typeclass. E.g. `Num` is a typeclass and all instances of `Num` are numerical types that can be added, subtracted, etcetera.

```hs
class Num a where
  (+) :: a -> a -> a
  (-) :: a -> a -> a
  abs :: a -> a
  ...
```

Num is the name of the type class we are defining.

- `a` is a **type variable**.
- The definitions are the **typing of the methods** that a Num must adhere to.

**Type Instances**
> When we define an instance of a type class, we have to adhere to the typing of the method(s) in the type class definition.

E.g. the `Show` type class, given some type "shows" it as a String on the terminal. Instances of `Show` must return String values.

```hs
class Show a where
  show :: a -> String
  
instance Show Bool where
  show True  = "True"
  show False = "False"
```

In a Haskell module, there are a bunch of definitions of expressions. If we have a definition for something – we can refer to it by its name in the program. The Haskell compiler works out the typing for each definition is – when we use it it checks if the type is compatible with the expression.
**Hence, we say that a type class brings function typings into scope.**


**Superclass Constraints**
> Sometimes, certain type classes have a superclass constraint stating that a type must also be an instance of a superclass to be an instance of the current class.

E.g. For some type `a` to be an instance of `Ord` it must be an instance of `Eq`.
```hs
class Eq a => Ord a where
  (<)  :: a -> a -> Bool
  (<=) :: a -> a -> Bool
  ...
```

---
# Polymorphism

- **Parametric polymorphism**
  - Allows us to reuse the same data structure for different types of elements. (like Generics in Java).
  - Essentially, type variables could take any type through type inferencing capabilities of the compiler.
```hs
 -- The identity function works on elements of any type
id :: a -> a
id x = x
-- Same as head function, works on lists that contain any type
head :: [a] -> a
head (x:xs) = 
```
- **Ad-hoc polymorphism**
  - A kind of polymorphism that is open to future extension.
  - This means that, a function that accepts types of instances of type classes are open to adding of more instances to that type class such that the original function will still work and change behavior as specified when used.
- **Subtype Polymorphism**
  - Similar to dynamic polymorphism, overloading of functions.


# Associativity
> Function associativity binds the strongest.

- **Function expressions associates to the right.**
```hs
xor = \a -> \b -> (a || b) && not (a && b)
-- is the same as 
xor = \a -> (\b -> (a || b) && not (a && b))
```
- **Function application associates to the left.**
```hs
xor True True
-- is the same as
(xor True) True
```
- **Function types associates to the right.**
```hs
xor :: Bool -> Bool -> Bool
-- is the same as 
xor :: Bool -> (Bool -> Bool)
```
---

# Evaluation

**Order of evaluation**
- An expression that is fully reduced is in `normal form`.
- Usually only case expressions are only evaluated.
- An expression that can be reduced is called a `redex`.

> Evaluation strategies determine the order in which we reduce expressions (like BODMAS in maths). An expression that can be reduced is called a redex.

**Strictness**, or function strictness, refers to functions whose parameters must be evaluated before they may be called by the user.

- **Call by value**
  - This is a strict evaluation strategy where all function arguents are reduced to values in normal forms and then passed to the function; even if it is not for certain whether that argument is to be used within the function.
- **Call by name**
  - A non-strict evaluation strategy where expressions are given to functions as arguments are not reduced before the function call is made. This means that redex expressions will be reduced only when they are needed in a calculation.
    -  **When will values be needed?** A case expression is the only construct that enforces the evluation of an expression because the value of the expression is required to proceed.We need the value of an expression when we cannot proceed with the case expression until we reduce the expression.

E.g.
```hs
fac' :: Int -> Int -> Int
fac' 0 m = m
fac' n m = fac' (n-1) (n*m)

--| REDUCTION
   fac 2
=> fac' 2 1
=> case 2 of
     0 -> 1
     _ -> fac' (2-1) (2*1)
=> fac' (2-1) (2*1)
=> case 2-1 of
     0 -> 2*1
     _ -> fac' ((2-1)-1) ((2-1)*(2*1))
=> case 1 of
     0 -> 2*1
     _ -> fac' ((2-1)-1) ((2-1)*(2*1))
```

**CBN vs CBV and adv/disadv**

|Call-by-value|Call-by-name|
|---|---|
|Reduce function arguments to normal forms before calling the function|Only reduce expressions when their value is needed|
|We may evaluate arguments even if they are never needed.|We may end up reducing the same expression over and over.|

---
# Lazy Evaluation

Both CBN and CBV have disadvantages that can be expensive. Lazy evaluation is an optimization including the concepts of both CBN and sharing. This means redex expressions as function arguments will still be evaluated only when needed but there won't be any duplicate evaluations.

> Sidenote. Lazy evaluation is the default evaluation strategy in Haskell. Since Haskell is a non-strict programming language, it can be strict if the compiler thinks its better or if we force it to be strict with the $! operator.

**How does sharing work?**

> Expressions/Definitions are represented by closures(stored on the heap) and pointers to them are then passed to functions as arguments. If an argument is used more than once within a function, then it will be evaluated multiple times.

Sharing is an optimisation which allows closures to be updated with their result once they have been evaluated provided that the closure (definition) has no parameters,meaning they only have to be evaluated once.

> Sharing turns arguments to function into local definitions.

Sharing turns arguments to function into local definitions using `let` or `where` bounds. When we refer to a local definition again it will only be evaluated once since the evaluation method is call by name anyway it won't be evaluated throughout.

E.g.
```hs
                              fac' n m = case n of
fac' n m = case n of            0 -> m
  0 -> m                 ==>    _ -> let x = n - 1
  _ -> fac' (n-1) (n*m)                  y = n * m
                                     in fac' x y
```

**What are closures?**
> A closure is a structure in memory at runtime that represents a function and its environment (expressions, definitions). 

Closures are essentially an array of pointers.
- E.g. consider a definition of the `not` function. In memory, there will be a particular memory location that stores a pointer to the code. Every call to `not` is a pointer to this memory location.

Briefly:
- A pointer points to some code somewhere in memory.
- Other pointers, calls to this code, are closures to the memory location. Specifically, closures can be let bindings and everything else within the scope of the code but are NOT parameters.

**Dynamic Closures**

> These are dynamically allocated closures at runtime, stored in the heap, for sharing optimizations of functions.


# Dry Runs

- Lazy Evaluation
```hs
length (take 2 (map even [1,2,3,4]))
```

```hs
length :: [a] -> Int
length []     = 0
length (x:xs) = 1 + length xs

take :: Int -> [a] -> [a]
take 0 _     = []
take n []    = []
take n (x:xs) = x : take (n-1) xs

map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
map f []     = []
map f (x:xs) = f x : map f xs
```

```hs
   length (take 2 (map even [1,2,3,4]))
=> length (take 2 (even 1 : map even [2,3,4])) 
=> length (even 1 : take (2-1) (map even [2,3,4])) -- take now has a non empty list argument.
=> 1 + length (take (2-1) (map even [2,3,4])) -- length knows its argument is not the empty list.
=> 1 + length (take 1 (map even [2,3,4]))
=> 1 + length (take 1 (even 2 : map even [3,4]))
=> 1 + length (even 2 : take (1-1) (map even [3,4]))
=> 1 + (1 + length (take (1-1) (map even [3,4])))
=> 1 + (1 + length (take 0 (map even [3,4]))) 
=> 1 + (1 + length [])
=> 1 + (1 + 0)
=> 1 + 1
=> 2
```

- The key point in lazy evaluation is to start from the left and evaluate to the right. When we have compositions like above, we check if we have the argument for each function left to right, when it is not the case we move to the right and check if that function has the arguments to be evaluated and so on.
- As long as we have all the information required to evaluate a function left to right we proceed, otherwise we are forced to evaluate the required function calls/reductions to the right to call the leftmost function/redex.

- **Call By Name**
  - Evaluation of redex expressions will not be done until required.

Take e.g. 
```hs
foldl :: (b -> a -> b) -> b -> [a] -> b
foldl f z [] = z
foldl f z (x:xs) = foldl f (f z x) xs
```

and

```hs
mySum :: [Int] -> Int
mySum’ = foldl (+) 0
```

Calling `mySum' [4, 8, 15]`, evaluation by call-by-name semantics would be as so:

```hs
  mySum’ [4,8,15]
=> foldl (+) 0 [4,8,15]
=> foldl (+) (0 + 4) [8,15]
=> foldl (+) (0 + 4 + 8) [15]
=> foldl (+) (0 + 4 + 8 + 15) []
=> 0 + 4 + 8 + 15
=> 27
```

- **Call By Value**
  - The redex expressions produced are evaluated to normal from right away before making further function calls. This happends whether the function will require the normal form in the calculation or not.

```hs
  mySum’ [4,8,15]
=> foldl (+) 0 [4,8,15]
=> foldl (+) (0 + 4) [8,15]
=> foldl (+) 4 [8,15]
=> foldl (+) (4 + 8) [15]
=> foldl (+) 12 [15]
=> foldl (+) (12 + 15) []
=> foldl (+) 27 []
=> 27


```

---
# Recursive Functions

E.g.

```hs
fac :: Int -> Int 
fac 0 = 1
fac n = n * fac (n-1)
```

**Naive recursive calls**
Consider a call to `fac` with `500`.
The naive way of evaluating recursion builds up large expressions (with lots of closures) because nothing forces the expressions to get evaluated at intermediate steps.

```hs
   fac 500
=> 500 * fac (500-1)
=> 500 * fac 499
=> 500 * (499 * fac (499-1))
=> 500 * (499 * fac 498)
=> 500 * (499 * (498 * fac (498-1)))
	 ...
=> 500 * 499 * ... * fac 0
=> 500 * 499 * ... * 1 -- multiplication can finally be evaluated
=> multiplication is evaluated
```

- The multiplication can never be reduced until the end because at no point do we have the second argument until we reach the base cases.

**Optimized Recrusive Functions**

> The Haskell compiler optimises this for us by recreating the function we call (i.e fac) with another function that has an **accumulating parameter**.

i.e.
```hs
-- Here m is the accumulating parameter
fac' :: Int -> Int -> Int
fac' 0 m = m
fac' n m = fac' (n-1) (n*m)
-- fac is then rewritten with fac'
fac :: Int -> Int
fac n = fac' n 1
```

The result of earlier calls to `fav` are accumulated in the second argument `m`.

- While the second argument will build up into a long list of closures if is evaluated lazily, the difference with naive recursion is that it can be forced to be evaluated because all arguments are present for multiplication.
---

# Data Types and Type Aliases

**Data type definitions**
Making custom data types is done through the `data` keyword.

> Data constructors are the values that inhabit the type they are defined in. They are the values that show up in your code, at the term level instead of the type level. By term level, we mean they are the values as they appear in your code or the values that your code evaluates to.

E.g. This is the definition of the data type for `Bool`. `“Bool”` is the name of the type, and `“False”` and `“True”` are data constructors:

```hs
data Bool = False | True
-- such that these values are contructed and used as so:
True :: Bool
False :: Bool
```

**Capabilities**
- We can pattern-match on data constructors
- We can use data constructors as values
- We can have as many number of data constructors as we want
- Name of the type is not the same as the data constructor (although we can name them the same)
- Data constructors can have parameters.

Creating some custom types:

```hs
data Module = CS141 | CS256 | CS132
data Language = Java | JS | Python | Haskell
data Void
```
---
**Parametrised Data Constructors**
> We can add parameters to a data constructor by adding their types after the constructor’s name.

```hs
data Shape a = Circle a a a
           | Rectangle a a

-- Data constructors of Shape have these types:
Circle :: a -> a -> a -> Shape
Rectangle :: a -> a -> Shape

-- take a Shape type and return its area: pattern matching the parameters
area :: Shape Float -> Float
area (Circle _ _ r) = pi * r ^ 2
area (Rectangle l w) = l * w

```

---

**Record Types**
> Better way of organizing data types.

Instead of:

`data Person = Person String String Int Float String String deriving (Show)`

Write a record structure such that it is possible to store collective information about a person:

```hs
data Person = Person { firstName :: String
, lastName :: String
, age :: Int
, height :: Float
, phoneNumber :: String
, flavor :: String
} deriving (Show)
```

The main benefit of this is that it creates functions that lookup fields in the data type. By using record syntax to create this data type, Haskell automatically made these functions: firstName, lastName, age, height,phoneNumber and flavor.

E.g. 
```hs
data Car = Car {company :: String, model :: String, year :: Int} deriving (Show)
ghci> Car {company="Ford", model="Mustang", year=1967}
```

**Parameterized types**
Type constructors can take types as parameters to produce new types.

The `Maybe` keyword is an algebraic data type/ADT.

E.g.
```hs
data Maybe Int = Nothing | Just Int
```

means that `Maybe Int` type returns either nothing or just an integer.

Avoid division by zero with error checking at runtime:

```hs
safeDiv :: Int -> Int -> Maybe Int
safeDiv x 0 = Nothing
safeDiv x y = Just (div x y)
```
We usually use type parameters when the type that's contained inside the data type's various value constructors isn't really that important for the type to work.

> Don't put type constraints into data declarations even if it seems to make sense, because you'll have to put them into the function type declarations either way.

E.g. Below we don't specify that the `Vector` type takes a that are contrained to the `Num` typeclass. Instead we will define the constraint in related functions instead.

```hs
data Vector a = Vector a a a deriving (Show)

vplus :: (Num t) => Vector t -> Vector t -> Vector t
(Vector i j k) `vplus` (Vector l m n) = Vector (i+l) (j+m) (k+n)

vectMult :: (Num t) => Vector t -> t -> Vector t
(Vector i j k) `vectMult` m = Vector (i*m) (j*m) (k*m)

scalarMult :: (Num t) => Vector t -> Vector t -> t
(Vector i j k) `scalarMult` (Vector l m n) = i*l + j*m + k*n
```
- **Type and Value constructors**
When we declare a custom type `Vector` we give it a single **type constructor** `a` as such `Vector a = ..` and then the **value contructors** specify the specific parameters the Vector type will take as so: `data Vector a = Vector a a a`.

---
**Recursive Data Types**
> Types defined in terms of itself.

```hs
data Nat = Zero 
         | Succ Nat

-- Zero :: Nat
-- Nat -> Nat :: Succ Nat

data BinTree a = Leaf a 
               | Node (BinTree a) (BinTree a)

-- a -> Bintree a :: Leaf
-- Bintree a -> Bintree a -> Bintree a :: Node 

-- bintree operations
flatten :: BinTree a ->  [a]
flatten (Leaf a) = [a]
flatten (Node l r) = flatten l ++ flatten r

depth :: BinTree a -> Int
depth (Leaf a) = 1
depth (Node l r) = 1 + max (depth l) (depth r)

size :: BinTree a -> Int
size (Leaf a) = 1
size (Node l r) = 1 + size l + size r
```

---
**Type Aliases/Type Synonyms**
> Assign alises/synonyms to `type`s with a given identifier followed by type and structure of alias type.

```hs
type String = [Char]
type Memory = [(String, Int)] -- Recall coursework 2
type Predicate a = a -> Bool
```

---
**Derived Instances**

Instances of type classes can be derived to allow a record to implement its operations and features. 
With the `deriving` keyword it is possible to implement these type classes for our own custom data types.

E.g. compare two `Person`s to see if they are the same people:

```hs
data Person = Person { firstName :: String
, lastName :: String
, age :: Int
} deriving (Eq)

```

This allows the type `Person` to be operated on with `==` and `/=` operations.
There's only one catch though, the types of all the fields also have to be part of the Eq typeclass. 

---
**Enum typeclass**
The Enum typeclass is for things that have predecessors and successors.
We can also make it part of the Bounded typeclass, which is for things that have a lowest possible value and highest possible value.

E.g. days of the week can be represented as an Enum type:

```hs
data Day = Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday
| Thursday | Friday | Saturday | Sunday
deriving (Eq, Ord, Show, Read, Bounded, Enum)
```
As the type Enum it is possible to use such functions:

```hs
ghci> succ Monday
Tuesday
ghci> pred Saturday
Friday
ghci> [Thursday .. Sunday]
[Thursday,Friday,Saturday,Sunday]
ghci> [minBound .. maxBound] :: [Day]
[Monday,Tuesday,Wednesday,Thursday,Friday,Saturday,Sunday]
```

---

# Higher order Functions

> Higher order functions are functions which operate on other functions, either taking another function as a parameter, or returning one as a result

> The process of currying, discussed earlier, is a higher order function, as a function takes a parameter, and returns another functioned, specialised by that parameter

**Sections**
Sections are partial applications of infix operators. If you give only one argument to an infix operator, it returns a function of the “missing” side of the operation, for example, if the left side of the infix exponent is given, a function taking the exponent as the parameter is returned, but if the right side is given, the function takes the base as parameter. This is written as:

```hs
> (^2)
\x -> x ^ 2

> (2^)
\x -> 2 ^ x
```


**Partial Application of Functions**

```hs
applyTwice :: (a -> a) -> a -> a
applyTwice f x = f (f x)

ghci> applyTwice (+3) 10
16
```

---

# Map

> Map - takes a function and a list and applies that function to every element in the list, producing a new list.

- The map definition (List instance of a Functor)
```hs
map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
map _ [] = []
map f (x:xs) = f x : map f xs

```


# Filter

- Filter - is a function that takes a predicate and a list and then returns the list of elements that satisfy the predicate.

```hs
filter :: (a -> Bool) -> [a] -> [a]
filter _ [] = []
filter p (x:xs)
  | p x = x : filter p xs
  | otherwise = filter p xs
```

The above means that: we filter a list with a predicate p, then check the predicate against each element and cons that element to the recursive call to the tail of the list otherwise don't.

E.g. Filtered quicksort, head pivot:

```hs
quicksort :: (Ord a) => [a] -> [a]
quicksort [] = []
quicksort (x:xs) =
  let smallerSorted = quicksort (filter (<=x) xs)
    biggerSorted = quicksort (filter (>x) xs)
  in smallerSorted ++ [x] ++ biggerSorted
```
---

# Lambdas

Lambdas are basically anonymous functions that are used because we need some functions only once. These are often seen instead of where clauses and need to be wrapped in brackets to determine scope. If pattern matching with lambda expressions fail there will be a runtime error.


E.g.
```hs
ghci> map (\(a,b) -> a + b) [(1,2),(3,5),(6,3),(2,6),(2,5)]
[3,8,9,8,7]
ghci> map (uncurry (+)) [(1,2),(3,5),(6,3),(2,6),(2,5)]
[3,8,9,8,7]
```

---

# Folds

> Fold maps a function to a list of elements are folds it into a single value.

A fold takes a binary function, a starting value/accumulator and a list to fold up. The binary function itself takes two parameters being the accumulator and an element of the list at a time.

The binary function is called with the accumulator and the first (or last) element and updates the value of the accumulator until the end of the list is reached.

- `foldl` - left fold 
> Left-associative fold of a structure, lazy in the accumulator. 

```hs
foldl :: (b -> a -> b) -> b -> [a] -> b
foldl f z []     = z
foldl f z (x:xs) = foldl f (f z x) xs
```

Implementation of `sum` with `foldl`:

````hs
sum' :: (Num a) => [a] -> a
sum' xs = foldl (\acc x -> acc + x) 0 xs
``````

where the lambda clause `(\acc x -> acc + x)` is the binary function and 0 is the starting value.

Except: The lambda function (\acc x -> acc + x) is the same as (+).

Hence:

```hs
sum' :: (Num a) => [a] -> a
sum' = foldl (+) 0

```
also does the job.

Generally, if you have a function like foo a = bar b a, you can rewrite it as foo = bar b, because of currying.

- `foldr` right fold

> Right-associative fold of a structure, lazy in the accumulator.

```hs
foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> [a] -> b
foldr f z []     = z
foldr f z (x:xs) = f x (foldr f z xs)
```

Common implementations:
```hs

and' :: [Bool] -> Bool
and' = foldr (&&) True

product' :: Num a => [a] -> a
product' = foldr (*) 1

length' :: [a] -> Int
length' = foldr (\x n -> n + 1) 0
```

---

**`foldl` vs `foldr`**

- The accumulator eats from the side the fold is done from.
- We fold from the right when building new lists, as working bottom up allows usage of `:` instead of `++` which is an expensive operation when compared.
- Right fold works on "infinite lists". To put it plainly, if you take an infinite list at some point and you fold it up from the right, you'll eventually reach the beginning of the list. However, if you take an infinite list at a point and you try to fold it up from the left, you'll never reach an end.
- `foldr` generates the entire expression before evaluation, with `foldr f z [1,2,3]` evaluating to `f 1 (f 2 (f 3 z))`.
  - As the chain of operations doesn’t contain a redex (reducible expression) until the entire chain is built, the entire expression must be generated before it can be evaluated. This means it will cause stack overflows on large lists.
- `foldl` applies the function as it goes along, with `foldl f z [1,2,3]` evaluating to `f (f (f z 1) 2) 3`.


---

**`foldl1` and `foldr1`**

The foldl1 and foldr1 functions work much like foldl and foldr, only you don't need to provide them with an explicit starting value.

They assume the first (or last) element of the list to be the starting value and then start the fold with the element next to it.

- Can only be applied to non-empty structures.
- Runtime exception if structure is empty.

These versions depend on the list passed having a value. Hence, an empty list would cause runtime errors while `foldl` and r wouldn't due to the explicit start value provided.

---
**Function composition**
A function which chains the output of one function into the input of the other.

```hs
(.) :: (b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> a -> c
(.) f g x = f (g x)
```
---

# Equational Reasoning Proofs
> **We can do equational reasoning in Haskell because** functions in Haskell are pure, i.e. they have no side-effects and their results only depend on their arguments. We can’t use equational reasoning on impure functions, because their results may depend on values other than the arguments, thereby rendering any properties we prove invalid.

**Approaches**
- If you can just rewrite the sides of an equation until they are the same, do so.
- If you can identify a variable, which if its value was known, you could write two sides of the equation until they are the same then:
  - If there are a finite number of values, perform case analysis on them.
  - If there are infinite values, consider proof by induction. 

**Arithmetic Axioms**
> Left Unit: $add\ Zero\ n\ =\ n$
> Right Unit: $add\ n\ Zero\ =\ n$
> Associativity: $add\ x\ (add\ y\ z)\ =\ add\ (add\ x\ y)\ z$
> Check guide for the rest...
> Try proving distributivity or commutativity proofs as lemmas whenever you might need them...


E.g. 
**Case Analysis**
```hs
not :: Bool -> Bool
not False	= True
not True	= False

-- proof of cases
	not (not False)
= {application to the inner `not`}
	not True
= {application to the `not`}
	False
```

**Eta Conversion**
Eta conversion is the “adding or dropping of abstraction over a function”.

This means that we can say the following are equivalent:
```
\x -> abs x
```
and
```
abs
```

**Induction**
The steps for performing a proof by induction are:

1. Select the variable to perform induction on. This may be the most used one, or the one which is used equally on both sides

2. Write out the proposition in terms of the variable to perform induction on, and with any other variables being arbitrary fixed constants of a given type.

3. Prove the base case
   - This is normally a direct proof. However, there is sometimes an additional nested inductive proof.

4. Prove the inductive step
    - Write out the inductive hypothesis
    - Use the inductive hypothesis in the proof of the inductive step. Commonly, the operations are in the following order:
      - Function application
      - Apply inductive hypothesis
      - Function unapplication

5. State the conclusion that the proposition is true by induction.

**Choices/Steps during proofs**
- Function application/unapplication.
- Apply a known theorem or assumption.
- Eta-conversion, expansion.
- Variable renaming, alpha equivalence.
  
---

# Foldables

> Foldables are data structures for which we can implement `foldr`. It is essentially a design pattern that allows us to fold up all elems of some structure t into some type b by applying a function `(a -> b -> b)` or `(b -> a -> b)`.

Haskell's combination of purity, higher order functions, parameterized algebraic data types, and typeclasses allows us to implement polymorphism on a much higher level than possible in other languages.

---
**Foldable typeclass*

> Implementing `foldr` or `foldl` for some ADT will give access to all other functions below.

```hs
class Foldable t where
    foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> t a -> b
    foldl :: (b -> a -> b) -> b -> t a -> b
    null :: t a -> Bool
    length :: t a -> Int
    elem :: Eq => a -> t a -> Bool
    maximum :: Ord a => t a -> a
    minimum :: Ord a => t a -> a
    sum :: Num a => t a -> a
    product :: Num a => t a -> a

  
instance Foldable [] where
  -- foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> [a] -> b
    foldr _ z []     = z
    foldr f z (x:xs) = f x (foldr f z xs)

data RoseTree a = Leaf a | Node [RoseTree a]
instance Foldable RoseTree where
  -- foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> RoseTree a -> b
  foldr f z (Leaf x) = f x z
  foldr f z (Node ns) =
        foldr (\x z’ -> foldr f z’ x) z ns

data BTree a = Leaf | Node (BTree a) a (Btree a)
instance Foldable BTree where
    -- foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> BTree a -> b
    foldr f z Leafx = z
    foldr f z (Nodex l x r) = f x (foldr f (foldr f z r) l)

data Tree a = Node a [Tree a]
instance Foldable Tree where
-- foldr :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> Tree a -> b
  foldr f z (Node a as) =
        f a (foldr (\x z -> foldr f z x) z as)
```
---

# Functors

> A type is a functor if it can represent a “context” for values of some arbitrary type that we can apply functions to.


**Functor**
The list type is part of the Functor typeclass.

```hs
class Functor f where
fmap :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b

-- | The built in `map` function is the Functor insance for lists.
instance Functor [] where
fmap = map
```

**Functor typeclass**
- Given context to two values to which a function is applied to... basically mapping.
```hs
class Functor f where
    fmap :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b

-- | Functor instance for lists.
instance Functor [] where
    fmap (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
    fmap _ []     = []
    fmap f (x:xs) = f x : map f xs

-- | Functor instance for Maybe.
instance Functor Maybe where
    fmap :: (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> Maybe b
    fmap _ Nothing  = Nothing
    fmap f (Just x) = Just $ f x

-- | Functor instance for an abstract type (BT)
data Tree a = Leaf a | Node (Tree a) (Tree a)
instance Functor Tree where 
  -- fmap :: (a -> b) -> Tree a -> Tree b
  fmap f (Leaf x)   = Leaf (f x)
  fmap f (Node l r) = Node (fmap f l) (fmap f r)

data RoseTree a = Leaf a | Node [RoseTree a]
instance Functor RoseTree where
  fmap f (Leaf x) = Leaf (f x)
  fmap f (Node ts) = Node (fmap (fmap f) ts)

data BTree a = Leaf | Node (BTree a) a (BTree a)
instance Functor BTree where
    -- fmap :: (a -> b) -> BTree a -> BTree b
    fmap f Leafx = Leafx
    fmap f (Nodex l x r) = Nodex (fmap f l) (f x) (fmap f r)

data PQueue a = MkPQueue [a] [a]
instance Functor PQueue where
  fmap f (MkPQueue xs ys) =
  MkPQueue (fmap f xs) (fmap f ys)

```

In order for something to be a functor it should satisfy two properties:
1. If we map the id function over a functor, the functor that we get back should be the same as the original functor. `fmap id = id`. 
2. If two sequential mapping operations are performed one after the other using two functions, the result should be the same as a single mapping operation with one function that is equivalent to applying the first function to the result of the second. `fmap (f . g)  ==  fmap f . fmap g`

> In other words, "mapping" doesn't change the structure of an input type. You get back the same type you input.

---

# Applicative Functors

> A type is an applicative functor if its values represent some form of context that we can lift function application into. Applicative functors are monoidal functors; essentially we can appl functions in context to values within the same context.

- Applicative is an intermediate class between Functor and Monad.

Recap of applicators:
```hs
($)   :: (a -> b) -> a -> b   -- gives the RHS more precedence, avoid parantheses
(<$>) :: (a -> b) -> f a -> f b  -- mapping a function 
(<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b   -- mapping a function in context
```

> So, in a sense, with applicative functors we’re bolting a Monoid onto a Functor to be able to deal with functions embedded in additional structure. In another sense, we’re enriching function application with the very structure
we were previously mapping over with Functor.

Example use with list context:
```hs
[(*2), (*3)] <*> [4, 5]
-- OR
(*) <$> [2, 3] <*> [4, 5] --fmap is left associative.
```
This maps functions in the context of a list structure to a list of values and we get back a list. `Applicative f => f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b`

```hs
class (Functor f) => Applicative f where
  pure  :: a -> f a
  (<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b

-- | Applicatives for lists.
instance Applicative [] where  
    pure x = [x]  
    fs <*> xs = [f x | f <- fs, x <- xs] 

-- | Applicative functor instance for Maybe
instance Applicative Maybe where
  pure                  = Just
  (Just f) <*> (Just x) = Just (f x)
  _        <*> _        = Nothing
```

E.g. use of the Maybe applicative:
```hs
>> Just (*2) <*> Just 2
>> Nothing <*> Nothing
```

**Applicative Laws**

> Some type f of kind * -> * is an applicative functor if it is a functor and there is a function of type f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b, subject to applicative functor laws.

In Haskell, a type f is an applicative functor if there are functions `pure` and `<*>`.

```hs
class Functor f => Applicative f where
	pure  :: a -> f a
	(<*>) :: f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
```
and the following laws apply for them:

**Applicative functor laws**

```hs
pure id <*> v = v                            -- Identity
pure f <*> pure x = pure (f x)               -- Homomorphism
u <*> pure y = pure ($ y) <*> u              -- Interchange
pure (.) <*> u <*> v <*> w = u <*> (v <*> w) -- Composition
```

Briefly, applicative functors are functors that support function application within their contexts. 
E.g. Expressions such as `(+) <$> Just 2 <*> Just 3` are said to be written in applicative style, which is as close as we can get to regular function application while working with a functor. If you pretend for a moment the (`<$>`), (`<*>`) and Just aren't there, our example looks just like `(+) 2 3`.

---

**Left and Right Association**

```hs
(<*) :: Applicative f => f a -> f b -> f a
x <* y = const <$> x <*> y
(*>) :: Applicative f => f a -> f b -> f a
x *> y = flip const <$> x <*> 
```

---
# Monads

> A type is a monad if its value represent some form of context that permits us to apply a function to all the elements in one context, producing one new context each which can then all be joined together into one final context.

In summary to compare Functors, Applicatives and Monads:
> A functor maps a function over some structure; an applicative maps a
function that is contained in some structure over some other structure
and then combines the two layers of structure like mappend. So you can
think of monads as another way of applying functions over structure,
with a couple of additional features.

- Monads can only be of kind `* -> *` such that the structure that we form the Monad instance for must have a data constructor. Therefore types like `Bool` cannot be Monads, while `Maybe` and `Either` can.

Class implementation
```hs
class Applicative m => Monad m where
  (>>=) :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
  (>>) :: m a -> m b -> m b
  return :: a -> m a

-- | Maybe monad.
data Maybe a = Nothing | Just a
instance Monad Maybe where 
  -- (>>=) :: Maybe a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
  return x      = Just x -- wrap into context
  Just x  >>= f = f x -- unwrap and apply function, change context
  Nothing >>= f = Nothing -- given Nothing return that.

-- | Either Monad.
data Either a b = Left a | Right b
instance Monad (Either e) where
  return x = Right x

  Left y >>= f = Left y
  Right x >>= f = f x

```

- `>>` - Mr. Pointy sequences two actions while discarding any resulting value of the first action.
- `>>=` - binding

**Comparing Functors, Applicatives and Monads**
```hs
fmap :: Functor f => (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
<*> :: Applicative f => f (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
>>= :: Monad f => f a -> (a -> f b) -> f b
```
---

- Monads take a value in context, unwrap it and put it into another context.
- Applicatives vs Monads: Applicative effects cannot depend on
the results of previous computations. Cannot sequence computations...

**Monad Laws**
- In Haskell, a type m is a monad if there are functions `return` and `>>=`

class Monad m where
  (>>=)  :: m a -> (a -> m b) -> m b
  return ::   a -> m a

and the following laws apply for them:

```hs
-- Left Identity
return x >>= f = f x
-- Right Identity
m >>= return = m
-- Associativity
(m >>= f) >>= g = m >>= (\x -> f x >>= g)

```
# Kinds in Haskell

`type :: kind`

The haskell compiler can infer kinds just as it infers types.

> "In type theory, a kind is the type of a type constructor or, less commonly, the type of a higher-order type operator. A kind system is essentially a simply typed lambda calculus 'one level up,' endowed with a primitive type, denoted * and called 'type', which is the kind of any (monomorphic) data type."

i.e.

```hs
Bool :: *
Maybe :: * -> *

```

- `lookup`
```hs
lookup :: Eq a => a -> [(a, b)] -> Maybe a
```

This returns the value of any existing key in a given associative list.

Return all values from associative list using a helper function and functors.

```hs
app :: Maybe (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> Maybe b
app Nothing _  = Nothing
app (Just f) x = f <$> x
```

# Either

`data Either e a = Left e | Right a`

The Either type is sometimes used to represent a value which is either correct or an error; by convention, the Left constructor is used to hold an error value and the Right constructor is used to hold a correct value (mnemonic: "right" also means "correct").

---
# The Unit type
```hs
() :: ()
```

Tuple with no components.

[**Monoids**](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.14.1.0/docs/Data-Monoid.html)

A type a is a Monoid if it provides an associative function (<>) that lets you combine any two values of type a into one, and a neutral element (mempty) such that

```
a <> mempty == mempty <> a == a
```
A Monoid is a Semigroup with the added requirement of a neutral element. Thus any Monoid is a Semigroup, but not the other way around.


Laws:
```hs
(x <> y) <> z = x <> (y <> z) -- associativity
mempty <> x = x               -- left identity
x <> mempty = x               -- right identity
```

Whenever, for instance, you see (<>) being used you know that, however the specific instance was defined, the operation being done is associative and has an identity element.

i.e.

```hs
mthreeConcat :: Monoid m => m -> m -> m -> m
mthreeConcat a b c = a <> b <> c
```

Other uses:
- `Writer` monad - A computation of type `Writer w a` computes a value of type a while producing extra output of type w which must be an instance of Monoid, and the bind operator of the monad uses mappend to accumulate the extra output. A typical use case would be logging, in which each computation produces a log entry for later inspection.

---
[**Semigroups**](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.14.1.0/docs/Data-Semigroup.html)
A type a is a Semigroup if it provides an associative function (<>) that lets you combine any two values of type a into one. Where being associative means that the following must always hold:

```
(a <> b) <> c == a <> (b <> c)
```


---
# State

```hs
data State s a = St (s -> (a,s))
    deriving Functor -- lab exercise!

runState :: State s a -> s -> (a,s)
runState (St m) = m

instance Applicative (State s) where
   pure x = St (\s -> (x,s))

   St mf <*> St mx = St (\s -> let (f,s') = mf s
                                   (x,s'') = mx s'
                               in (f x,s''))
```

# System.Random

```hs
import System.Random

randomNumber :: State StdGen Int
randomNumber = St random

twoRandomNumbers :: State StdGen (Int, Int)
twoRandomNumbers = mkPair <$> randomNumber <*> randomNumber
   where mkPair a b = (a,b)
```

---

# Zippers

> A zipper is a purely functional data structure which can be used to efficiently traverse another data structure if the same element needs to be accessed repeatedly or element access is relative to the last-accessed element by allowing a particular element of the data structure to be “focused”.

> The Zipper is an idiom that uses the idea of “context” to the means of manipulating locations in a data structure. Zipper monad is a monad which implements the zipper for binary trees.

Consider a tree:
```hs
data Tree a = Empty | Node a (Tree a) (Tree a) deriving (Show) 
```

Consider a problem where we want to change the root of one of the subtrees in a tree. Instea dof pattern matching on every single subtree in the tree, which is not scalable as we insert more nodes, we define `Directions` where giving a list of these to a tree will make us traverse to that position and make changes then.

e.g. changing elem at some place
```hs
data Direction = L | R deriving (Show)  -- Direction type.
type Directions = [Direction]           -- type alias for list of directions.
  
changeToP :: Directions-> Tree Char -> Tree Char  
changeToP (L:ds) (Node x l r) = Node x (changeToP ds l) r  
changeToP (R:ds) (Node x l r) = Node x l (changeToP ds r)  
changeToP [] (Node _ l r) = Node 'P' l r 
```

e.g. get elem at position
```hs
elemAt :: Directions -> Tree a -> a  
elemAt (L:ds) (Node _ l _) = elemAt ds l  
elemAt (R:ds) (Node _ _ r) = elemAt ds r  
elemAt [] (Node x _ _) = x  

```

Consider some binary tree:
```hs
data BinTree a = BinLeaf a | BinNode (BinTree a) (BinTree a)
```

Define a direction type and zipper type for the tree then define basic functions to traverse the tree `turnRight`, `turnRight`:

```hs
data Direction a = L (BinTree a) | R (BinTree a)
data BinZipper a = Pos [Direction a] (BinTree a)

turnRight :: BinZipper a -> Maybe (BinZipper a)
turnRight (Pos ds (BinNode l r)) = Just (Pos (R l:ds) r)
turnRight (Pos ds (BinLeaf _)) = Nothing

turnLeft :: BinZipper a -> Maybe (BinZipper a)
turnLeft (Pos ds (BinNode l r)) = Just (Pos (L r:ds) l)
turnLeft (Pos ds (BinLeaf _)) = Nothing

```

---

# Infinite Data Structures

> Haskell is a lazy language. As a result, arguments to functions will only be evaluated if they are needed (i.e. inspected by a case expression). This means that we can define infinite data types and functions on them, such as szipWith, without a problem. Specifically, this is possible because we only generate as many elements of the stream as a required by a function which consumed elements of the stream. In a strict language, invoking szipWith would hang the program because it would try to generate the whole (infinite) stream.

i.e. Streams:

```hs
data Stream a = Cons a (Stream a)

-- infinite list of ones
ones :: Stream Integer
ones = Cons 1 ones

-- infinite list zipwith to aid infinite fibo
szipWith :: (a -> b -> c) -> Stream a -> Stream b -> Stream c
szipWith f (Cons x xs) (Cons y ys) = 
  Cons (f x y) (szipWith f xs ys)

-- infinite fibo
fibs = Cons 1 (Cons 1 (szipWith (+) fibs (stail fibs)))
  where
    stail :: Stream a -> Stream a
    stail (Cons _ xs) = xs
```





















