# Lab notes

## Pointers, Arrays, etc.

An array of some type is declared:
```c++
type arr[size]; // block of memory identified by "arr".
```
Similarly a pointer:
```c++
type* p; // pointer to type in memory.
```


**Pointer recap**

- A pointer variable can hold the address of an object of the appropriate type:

ie. 

```c++
char* p = &arr[5] // p points to the address of 6th elem in arr
char p1 = *p // p1 points to the object p points to.
```

**The prefix operators**

- A prefix unary `*` means "contents of", aka the dereference operator; ie `*ptr` means the contents of the address that `ptr` points to.
- A prefix unary `&` means "address of"; ie `&myvalue` means the address of `myvalue` in memory.

> A variable that stores the address of another variable in memory is a pointer.

Due to the ability of a pointer to directly refer to the value that it points to, a pointer has different properties when it points to a char than when it points to an int or a float. Once dereferenced, the type needs to be known. And for that, the declaration of a pointer needs to include the data type the pointer is going to point to.

```c++
int foo = 64; // some value identified by "foo" in memory.
int* bar = &foo; // pointer called bar stores the addr of foo in memory.
int baz = *bar; // dereference the addr to get 64 back.

cout << foo << " " << bar << " " << baz;
```

**Suffix Operators**

 > The `*` coming after (suffix) the type declares that it is a pointer.

- A suffix unary `*` declares a pointer variable, ie `int*` creates a pointer to a location in memory, treated as an `int` value.
- A suffix unary `&` means "reference to", this is similar to a pointer but we need not use a prefix `*` to access value at reference. 


When used in declarations, operators (such as &, ∗, and []) are called declarator operators:
```c++
T a[n]; // T[n]: array of n Ts 
T *p; // T*: pointer to T 
T &r; // T&: reference to T
```

**Pointers and arrays**

- Pointers and arrays support the same set of operations, with the same meaning for both. The main difference being that pointers can be assigned new addresses, while arrays cannot.

ie.

```c++
// more pointers
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main ()
{
  int numbers[5];
  int * p;
  p = numbers;  *p = 10;
  p++;  *p = 20;
  p = &numbers[2];  *p = 30;
  p = numbers + 3;  *p = 40;
  p = numbers;  *(p+4) = 50;
  for (int n=0; n<5; n++)
    cout << numbers[n] << ", ";
  return 0;
}
```

**Pointer arithmetic**

To conduct arithmetical operations on pointers is a little different than to conduct them on regular integer types. To begin with, only addition and subtraction operations are allowed; the others make no sense in the world of pointers. But both addition and subtraction have a slightly different behavior with pointers, according to the size of the data type to which they point.

- When adding one to a pointer, the pointer is made to point to the following element of the same type, and, therefore, the size in bytes of the type it points to is added to the pointer since that will be the location to the next val of that type in the structure being traversed.

Post/Pre increment:
```c++
*p++   // same as *(p++): increment pointer, and dereference unincremented address
*++p   // same as *(++p): increment pointer, and dereference incremented address
++*p   // same as ++(*p): dereference pointer, and increment the value it points to
(*p)++ // dereference pointer, and post-increment the value it points to 
```

Pointers can be passed as `const`, hence will not be altered after call - otherwise altered.

ie.

```c++
void print_all (const int* start, const int* stop)
{
  const int * current = start;
  while (current != stop) {
    cout << *current << '\n';
    ++current;     // increment pointer
  }
}
```

**void pointers**

The void type of pointer is a special type of pointer. Void represents the absence of type. Therefore, void pointers are pointers that point to a value that has no type (and thus also an undetermined length and undetermined dereferencing properties).

This gives void pointers a great flexibility, by being able to point to any data type, from an integer value or a float to a string of characters. In exchange, they have a great limitation: the data pointed to by them cannot be directly dereferenced (which is logical, since we have no type to dereference to), and for that reason, any address in a void pointer needs to be transformed into some other pointer type that points to a concrete data type before being dereferenced.



